But once Zeus had driven Hector and Hector's Trojans
hard against the ships, he left both armies there,
milling among the hulls to bear the brunt
and wrenching work of war—no end in sight—
while Zeus himself, his shining eyes turned north,
gazed a world away to the land of Thracian horsemen,
the Mysian fighters hand-to-hand and the lordly Hippemolgi
who drink the milk of mares, and the Abii, most decent men alive.
But not a moment more would he turn his shining eyes to Troy.
Zeus never dreamed in his heart a single deathless god
would go to war for Troy's or Achaea's forces now.
But the mighty god of earthquakes was not blind.
He kept his watch, enthralled by the rush of battle,
aloft the summit of timbered Samos facing Thrace.
From there the entire Ida ridge swung clear in view,
the city of Priam clear and the warships of Achaea.
Climbing out of the breakers, there Poseidon sat
and pitied the Argives beaten down by Trojan troops
and his churning outrage rose against the Father.
Suddenly down from the mountain's rocky crags
Poseidon stormed with giant, lightning strides
and the looming peaks and tall timber quaked
beneath his immortal feet as the sea lord surged on.
Three great strides he took, on the fourth he reached his goal,
Aegae port where his famous halls are built in the green depths,
the shimmering golden halls of the god that stand forever.
Down Poseidon dove and yoked his bronze-hoofed horses
onto his battle-car, his pair that raced the wind
with their golden manes streaming on behind them,
and strapping the golden armor round his body,
seized his whip that coils lithe and gold
and boarded his chariot launching up and out,
skimming the waves, and over the swells they came,
dolphins leaving their lairs to sport across his wake,
leaping left and right—well they knew their lord.
And the sea heaved in joy, cleaving a path for him
and the team flew on in a blurring burst of speed,
the bronze axle under the war-car never flecked with foam,
the stallions vaulting, speeding Poseidon toward Achaea's fleet.
There is a vast cave, down in the dark sounding depths,
mid-sea between Tenedos and Imbros' rugged cliffs . . .
Here the god of the earthquake drove his horses down,
he set them free of the yoke and flung before them
heaps of ambrosia, fodder for them to graze.
Round their hoofs he looped the golden hobbles
never broken, never slipped, so there they'd stand,
stock-still on the spot to wait their lord's return
and off Poseidon strode to Achaea's vast encampment.
But the Trojans swarmed like flame, like a whirlwind
following Hector son of Priam blazing on nonstop,
their war cries shattering, crying as one man—
their hopes soaring to take the Argive ships
and slaughter all their best against the hulls.
But the ocean king who grips and shakes the earth,
rising up from the offshore swell, urged the Argives,
taking the build and tireless voice of Calchas.
First the god commanded the Great and Little Ajax,
hungry for war as both men were already, "Ajax, Ajax!
Both of you—fight to save the Achaean armies,
call up your courage, no cringing panic now!
At other points on the line I have no fear
of the Trojans' hands, invincible as they seem—
troops who had stormed our massive wall in force—
our men-at-arms will hold them all at bay.
But here i fear the worst, I dread a breakthrough.
Here this firebrand, rabid Hector leads the charge,
claiming to be the son of high and mighty Zeus.
But the two of you, if only a god could make you
stand fast yourselves, tense with all your power,
and command the rest of your men to stand fast too—
then you could hurl him back from the deep-sea ships,
hard as he hurls against you, even if Zeus himself
impels the madman on."
In the same breath the god
who shakes the mainland struck both men with his staff
and filled their hearts with strength and striking force,
put spring in their limbs, their feet and fighting hands.
Then off he sped himself with the speed of a darting hawk
that soaring up from a sheer rock face, hovering high,
swoops at the plain to harry larks and swallows—
so the lord of the earthquake sped away from both.
First of the two to. know the god was rapid Ajax.
Oileus' son alerted Telamon's son at once:
"Ajax, since one of the gods who hold Olympus,
a god in a prophet's shape, spurs us on to fight
beside the ships—and I tell you he's not Calchas,
seer of the gods who scans the flight of birds . . .
The tracks in his wake, his stride as he sped away—
I know him at once, with ease—no mistaking the gods.
And now, what's more, the courage inside my chest
is racing faster for action, full frontal assault—
feet quiver beneath me, hands high for the onset!"
And Telamonian Ajax joined him, calling out,
"I can feel it too, now, the hands on my spear,
invincible hands quivering tense for battle, look—
the power rising within me, feet beneath me rushing me on!
I even long to meet this Hector in single combat,
blaze as he does nonstop for bloody war!"
So they roused each other, exulting in the fire,
the joy of battle the god excited in their hearts.
And he sped to the rear to stir more ranks of Argives,
men refreshing their strength against the fast ships,
dead on their feet from the slogging work of war—
and anguish caught their hearts to see the Trojans,
troops who had stormed their massive wall in force.
They watched that assault, weeping freely now . . .
they never thought they would fight free of death.
But a light urging sent by the god of earthquakes
rippled through their lines and whipped battalions on.
Spurring Teucer and Leitus first with bracing orders,
then the fighting Peneleos, Thoas and Deipyrus,
Meriones and Antilochus, both strong with the war cry,
Poseidon pressed them on with winging charges: "Shame—
you Argives, raw recruits—and I, I trusted in you,
certain that if you fight you'll save our ships!
But if you hang back from the grueling battle now,
your day has dawned to be crushed by Trojans. What disgrace—
a marvel right before my eyes! A terrible thing . . .
and I never dreamed.the war would come to this:
the Trojans advancing all the way to our ships,
men who up till now had panicked like deer,
food in the woods for jackals, leopards, wolves—
helpless, racing for dear life, all fight gone.
For months on end the Trojans would have no heart
to stand and face the Argives' rage and bloody hands.
Not for a moment. Ah but now, quite exposed,
far from Troy they battle around our hollow ships,
thanks to our leader's weakness, our armies' slacking off.
Our men fight with him. They'd rather drop and die
by our fast trim ships than rise to their defense.
And what if it's all true and the man's to blame—
lord of the far-flung kingdoms, hero Agamemnon—
because he spurned the famous runner Achilles?
How on earth can we hang back from combat now?
Heal our feuds at once! Surely they can be healed,
the hearts of the brave. How can you hold back
your combat-fury any longer? Not with honor—
you, the finest men in all our ranks . . .
Why, not even I would rail against that man,
that worthless coward who cringes from the fighting.
But you, I round on you with all my heart. Weaklings!
You'll make the crisis worse at any moment with this,
this hanging back. Each of you get a grip on yourself—
where's your pride, your soldier's sense of shame?
A great battle rises before us! Look—Hector
the king of the war cry fights beside our ships,
assaulting in all his force. Hector's crashed our gates,
he's burst the tremendous bar!"
His voice like a shock wave,
the god of the earthquake spurred the Argive fighters on—
battalions forming around the two Aeantes, full strength,
crack battalions the god of war would never scorn,
rearing midst their ranks, nor would Pallas Athena
driver of armies. Here were the best picked men
detached in squads to stand the Trojan charge
and shining Hector: a wall of them bulked together,
spear-by-spear, shield-by-shield, the rims overlapping,
buckler-to-buckler, helm-to-helm, man-to-man massed tight
and the horsehair crests on glittering helmet horns brushed
as they tossed their heads, the battalions bulked so dense,
shoulder-to-shoulder close, and the spears they shook
in daring hands packed into jagged lines of battle—
single-minded fighters facing straight ahead,
Achaeans primed for combat.
Trojans pounded down on them!
Tight formations led by Hector careering breakneck on
like a deadly rolling boulder torn from a rock face—
a river swollen with snow has wrenched it from its socket,
immense floods breaking the bank's grip, and the reckless boulder
bounding high, flying with timber rumbling under it,
nothing can stop it now, hurtling on undaunted
down, down till it hits the level plain
and then it rolls no more for all its wild rush.
So Hector threatened at first to rampage through
the Argives' ships and shelters and reach the sea
with a single sudden charge, killing all the way.
But once he crashed against those dense battalions
dead in his tracks he stopped, crushed up against them:
sons of Achaea faced him now, stabbing away with swords,
with two-edged spears, hoisting him off their lines—
and he gave ground, staggering, reeling, shouting out
to his troops with shrill cries, "Trojans! Lycians!
Dardan skirmishers hand-to-hand—stand by me here!
They cannot hold me off any longer, these Achaeans,
not even massed like a wall against me here—
they'll crumble under my spear, well I know,
if the best of immortals really drives me on,
Hera's lord whose thunder drums the sky!"
So he shouted,
lashing the rage and fighting-fury in every Trojan.
And breaking out of their ranks Deiphobus strode,
the son of Priam fired for feats of arms, there,
thrusting his balanced round buckler before him,
step by springy step on the balls of his feet,
pressing forward under his shield. But Meriones,
taking aim at Deiphobus, hurled his flashing spear
and struck—no miss!—right in the bull's-hide boss
but the spear did not ram through, far from it,
the long shaft snapped at the spearhead's socket—
the Trojan had thrust his shield at arm's length,
shrinking before the expert marksman's lance.
But now Meriones pulled back to his cohorts,
stung with rage for two defeats at once:
victory shattered„ spearshaft smashed to bits.
He went on the run to Achaea's ships and shelters,
out for the heavy lance he'd left aslant his hut.,
The rest fought on with deafening war cries rising.
Teucer was first to kill his man, a son of Mentor,
breeder of stallions, the rugged spearman Imbrius.
He had lived in Pedaeon, before the Argives came,
and wed a bastard daughter of Priam, Medesicaste,
but once the rolling ships of Achaea swept ashore,
home he came to Troy where he shone among the Trojans,
living close to Priam, who prized him like his sons.
Under his ear Great Ajax stabbed with a heavy lance,
wrenched the weapon out and down he went like a tall ash
on a landmark mountain ridge that glistens far and wide—
chopped down by an ax, its leaves running with sap,
strewn across the earth . . . So Imbrius fell,
the fine bronze armor clashing against him hard.
Teucer charged forward, mad to strip that gear
but as Teucer charged, Hector flung his lance—
a glint of bronze—but the Argive saw it coming,
dodged to the side and it missed him by an inch
and hit Amphimachus, Cteatus' son and Actor's heir,
the shaft slashed his chest as he ran toward the front
and down he went, thundering, armor clanging round him.
And Hector rushed to tear the helmet off his head,
snug on Amphimachus' brows, the gallant soldier—
Hector rushing in and Ajax lunged with a spear
yet the burnished weapon could not pierce his skin,
Hector's whole body was cased in tremendous bronze.
But Ajax did stab home at the shield's jutting bulge,
beating Hector back with enormous driving force
and he gave ground, back and away from both corpses
as Argives hauled them from the fighting by the heels.
The captains of Athens, Stichius, staunch Menestheus,
bore Amphimachus back to Achaea's waiting lines.
But the two Aeantes blazing in battle-fury
saw to Imbrius now . . . as two lions seizing a goat
from under the guard of circling rip-tooth hounds,
lugging the carcass on through dense matted brush,
hoist it up from the earth in their big grinding jaws.
So the ramping, crested Aeantes hoisted Imbrius high,
stripping his gear in mid-air, and the Little Ajax,
raging over Amphimachus' death, lopped the head
from the corpse's limp neck and with one good heave
sent it spinning into the milling fighters like a ball,
right at the feet of Hector, tumbling in the dust.
And then the heart of Poseidon quaked with anger—
his own grandson brought down in the bloody charge.
He surged along the Achaean ships and shelters,
spurring Argives, piling griefs on Trojans.
The famous spearman Idomeneus crossed his path—
he'd come from a friend who just emerged from battle
gashed in back of the kneecap, gouged by whetted bronze:
That soldier the comrades carried off but Idomeneus,
giving the healers orders, made for his own tent
though he still yearned for action face-to-face.
And the god of earthquakes only fueled his fire,
taking the voice of Thoas, son of Andraemon,
king over all Pleuron, craggy Calydon too
and Aetolian men he ruled revered him like a god:
"Idomeneus, captain of Cretans under arms—
where have the threats all gone
that sons of Achaea leveled at these Trojans?"
The Cretan captain Idomeneus answered, "Thoas
no man's to blame now, so far as I can tell.
Every one of us knows the ropes in war.
No one here's in the grip of bloodless fear,
collapsing in cowardice, ducking the grim assault.
No, this is the pleasure of overweening Zeus, it seems—
to kill the Achaeans here, our memory blotted out
a world away from Argos. But you, Thoas,
you who were always rock-steady in battle
and braced the ones you saw go slack and flinch—
don't quit now, Thoas, urge each man you find!"
The god of earthquakes answered back, "Idomeneus—
may that man, that coward never get home from Troy—
let him linger here, ripping sport for the dogs,
whoever shirks the fight while this day lasts.
Quick, take up your gear and off we go.
Shoulder-to-shoulder, swing to the work, we must—
just two as we are—if we hope to make some headway.
The worst cowards, banded together, have their power
but you and I have got the skill to fight their best!"
With that he strode away, a god in the wars of men.
As soon as Idomeneus reached his well-built shelter
he strapped his burnished armor round his body,
grasped two spears and out he ran like a lightning bolt
the Father grips and flings from brilliant Olympus,
a dazzling sign to men—a blinding forked flash.
So the bronze flared on his chest as out he rushed
but his rough-and-ready aide-in-arms Meriones
intercepted him just outside the tent . . .
He was on his way for a new bronze spear to use
and staunch Idomeneus shouted out, "Meriones—
racing son of Molus, brother-in-arms, old friend,
why back from the lines, why leave the fight behind?
Taken a wound, some spearhead sapped your strength?
Or come with a word for me? Does someone need me?
I have no mind to sit it out in the shelters—
what I love is battle!"
Never flustered,
the cool-headed Meriones took his point:
"Idomeneus, captain of Cretans under arms,
I've come for a spear to fight with,
if you still have one left inside your tents.
I've just splintered the lance I used to carry,
smashed it against his shield—swaggering Deiphobus."
But the Cretan captain Idomeneus countered, "Spears?
If it's. spears you want, you'll find not one but twenty,
all propped on my shelter's shining inner wall:
Trojan weapons, stripped from the men I kill.
It's not my way, I'd say, to fight at a distance,
out of enemy range.
So I take my plunder—spears, bossed shields,
helmets and breastplates, gleaming, polished bright."
"And so do I, by god!"-the cool Meriones blazed up
in his own defense-"They crowd my ship and shelter,
hoards of Trojan plunder, but out of reach just now.
Though I never forgot my courage, I can tell you—
not I, there at the front where we win glory,
there I take my stand whenever a pitched battle
rears its head. Another Achaean armed in bronze
may well be blind to the way I fight. Not you—
you are the one who knows me best, I'd say."
And the Cretan captain Idomeneus answered warnly,
"I know your style, your courage. No need for you to tell it.
If we all formed up along the ships right now,
our best men picked for an ambush—
that's where you really spot a fighter's mettle,
where the brave and craven always show their stripes.
The skin of the coward changes color all the time,
he can't get a grip on himself, he can't sit still,
he squats and rocks, shifting his weight from foot to foot,
his heart racing, pounding inside the fellow's ribs,
his teeth chattering—he dreads some grisly death.
But the skin of the brave soldier never blanches.
He's all control. Tense but no great fear.
The moment he joins his comrades packed in ambush
he prays to wade in carnage, cut-and-thrust at once.
Who could deny your nerve there, your fighting hands?
Why, even if you were badly wounded in battle,
winged by a shaft or gored by a blade close-up,
the weapon would never hit you behind, in neck or back—
it would pierce your chest or guts as you press forward,
lusting for all the champions' lovely give-and-take.
On with it! No more standing round like bragging boys—
someone will dress us down, and roughly too.
Off you go to my shelter. Choose a sturdy spear."
Meriones a match for the rapid god of battles
ran for the tent, seized a fine bronze lance
and hot for action rushed to catch his captain.
And he went on to war as grim as murderous Ares,
his good son Panic stalking beside him, tough, fearless,
striking terror in even the combat-hardened veteran, yes,
both of them marching out of Thrace, geared to fight the Ephyri
or Phlegians great with heart, but they turn deaf ears
to the prayers of both sides at once, handing glory
to either side they choose. So on they marched,
Meriones and Idomeneus commanders of armies
strode to battle helmed in gleaming bronze,
Meriones first to ask, "Son of Deucalion,
where do you say we join the fighting now?
Right of the whole engagement, work the center
or go at the left flank? That's the place, t think—
nowhere else are the long-haired Argives so outfought."
The Cretan captain Idomeneus answered quickly,
"Plenty of others can shield the ships mid-line,
the two Aeantes, Teucer the best Achaean archer,
an expert too at fighting head-to-head.
They'll give royal Hector his fill of blows,
strong on attack, glutton for battle as he is.
Berserk for blood, he'll find it uphill work
to beat their valor down, matchless hands at war,
and gut our ships with fire—unless almighty Zeus
should fling a torch at the fast trim ships himself.
When it comes to men, Great Ajax yields to no one,
no mortal who eats Demeter's grain, I tell you,
one you can break with bronze and volleyed rocks.
Not even Achilles who smashes whole battalions—
he would never yield to him in a stand-up fight
though in downfield racing none can touch the man.
So lead us on to the left flank—we'll soon see
if we give our enemy glory or win it for ourselves."
And quick as the god of war Meriones led the way
till they reached the front his captain pointed out.
When the Trojans saw Idomeneus fierce as fire,
him and his aide-in-arms in handsome blazoned gear,
they all cried out and charged them through the press
and a sudden, pitched battle broke at the ships' stems.
As gale-winds swirl and shatter under the shrilling gusts
on days when drifts of dust lie piled thick on the roads
and winds whip up the dirt in a dense whirling cloud—
so the battle broke, storming chaos, troops inflamed,
slashing each other with bronze, carnage mounting,
manslaughtering combat bristling with rangy spears,
the honed lances brandished in hand and ripping flesh
and the eyes dazzled now, blind with the glare of bronze,
glittering helmets flashing, breastplates freshly burnished,
shields fiery in sunlight, fighters plowing on in a mass.
Only a veteran steeled at heart could watch that struggle
and still thrill with joy and never feel the terror.
The two powerful sons of Cronus, Zeus and Poseidon,
their deathless spirits warring against each other,
were building mortal pains for seasoned heroes.
Zeus willing a Trojan victory, Hector's victory,
lifting the famous runner Achilles' glory higher,
but he had no lust to destroy the whole Argive force
before the walls of Troy—all the Father wanted
was glory for Thetis and Thetis' strong-willed son.
But Poseidon surging in secret out of the gray surf
went driving into the Argive ranks.and lashed them on,
agonized for the fighters beaten down by Trojans,
and his churning outrage rose against great Zeus.
Both were gods of the same line, a single father,
but Zeus was the elder-born and Zeus knew more.,
And so Poseidon shrank from defending allies
out in the open—all in secret, always
armed like a man the god kept urging armies on.
Both gods knotted the rope of strife and leveling war,
strangling both sides at once by stretching the mighty cable,
never broken, never slipped, that snapped the knees of thousands.
And there, grizzled gray as he was, he spurred his men,
Idomeneus ramping amidst the Trojans, striking panic.
He finished Othryoneus, a man who'd lived in Cabesus,
one who had just come at the rousing word of war
and asked for Priam's loveliest daughter, Cassandra—
with no bride-price offered—
but Othryoneus promised a mighty work of battle:
he would rout the unwilling Argives out of Troy.
And old King Priam bent his head in assent,
promised the man his daughter, so on he fought,
trusting his life to oaths taken, promises struck—
till Idomeneus took his life with a glinting spear,
struck him coming on with his high, swaggering strides.
His breastplate could not save him, the bronze he always wore,
and the shaft pierced his bowels. He fell with a crash
as Idomeneus boasted, shouting over him, "Bravo,
Othryoneus, bravo to you beyond all men alive!
If you can really keep your promise to Priam now,
who promised his daughter—a true blood-wedding day!
Look, we'll make you a promise-we'll keep it too.
We'll hand you Agamemnon's loveliest daughter,
lead her here from Argos, marry her off to you
if you'll just help us raze the walls of Troy.
Just step this way! So we can come to terms
by the deep-sea ships and strike our marriage pact—
you'll find our price for brides not quite so killing!"
The hero seized his foot, dragging him through the rout.
But Asius leapt down to defend his comrade, just ahead
of his chariot-horses still held close by a driver,
the team snorting, panting over his shoulders—
Asius strained in fury to spear Idomeneus
but the Cretan took him first.
A spearhead punched his gullet under the chin
and the bronze point went ripping through his nape
and down the Trojan fell as an oak or white poplar falls
or towering pine that shipwrights up on a mountain
hew down with whetted axes for sturdy ship timber—
so he stretched in front of his team and chariot,
sprawled and roaring, clawing the bloody dust.
His driver out of his mind, what mind he had,
lost all nerve to wheel his horses round
and give the slip to his enemy's deadly hands
and staunch Antilochus speared him through the midriff.
His breastplate could not save him, the bronze he, always wore,
and the lance impaled his guts—he gasped, convulsed
and out of his well-made car the Trojan pitched—
and as for his team, proud Nestor's son Antilochus
drove them out of the Trojans into Argive lines.
But raging in tears for Asius came Deiphobus
charging against Idomeneus, heaving a flashing spear—
but Idomeneus saw it coming, dodged the bronze point
by crouching under his buckler's full round cover.
He always carried it, layered with hide and ringed
with gleaming bronze, fitted with double cross-stays—
under it low he hunched and the brazen spear flew past
with a grating screech as the shaft grazed the shield.
But Deiphobus' strong swift hurl was not for nothing,
no, he caught Hypsenor, Hippasus' son the captain,
struck him under the midriff, slit his liver
and that instant the man's knees went limp.
Deiphobus shouted, vaunting in wild glory,
"Asius dies, but not without revenge!
Down to the god of death he goes, I tell you,
down to the mighty gates but thrilled at heart—
look at the escort I have sent him for the journey!"
The more he gloried, the more grief swept the Argives,
brave Antilochus most, his battle-passion rising,
stunned with pain but he would not fail Hypsenor.
He ran to straddle and hide him with his shield
as a brace of comrades shouldered up the fighter:
Echius' son Mecisteus helping good Alastor
bore him back to the hollow warships, groaning hard.
But Idomeneus never slacked his fury, always struggling
to plunge some Trojan soldier in deep shrouding night
or fall himself, beating disaster off his lines.
And here was a royal kill, the son of Aesyetes,
the hero Alcathous, son-in-law to Anchises,
wed to his eldest daughter, Hippodamia . . .
Her father and noble mother loved her dearly,
the pride of their halls excelling all her age
in beauty, works of the loom and good clear sense.
So the bravest man in the broad realm of Troy
took her hand in marriage, true, the very man
Poseidon crushed at the hands of Idomeneus here,
spellbinding his shining eyes, crippling his fine legs.
He couldn't escape—no retreat, no dodging the stroke,
like a pillar or tree crowned with leaves, rearing,
standing there stock-still as the hero Idomeneus
stabbed him square in the chest
and split the bronze plate that cased his ribs,
gear that had always kept destruction off his flesh
but it cracked and rang out now, ripped by the spear.
Down Alcathous crashed and the point stuck in his heart
and the heart in its last throes jerked and shook the lance—
the butt-end quivering into the air till suddenly
rugged Ares snuffed its fury out, dead still.
And Idomeneus shouted, vaunting in wild glory,
"Now, Deiphobus, now shall we call it quits at last?
Three men killed for the one you bragged about so much!
Come here, you idiot—stand up to me yourself
so you can see what cut of man I am. Look,
a son of Zeus come here to face you down.
He first bore Minos, watch and ward of Crete,
then Minos bore an illustrious son Deucalion, yes,
and Deucalion fathered me to command a race of men
through the length and breadth of Crete, and now our ships
have borne me here to your shores to be your curse,
a curse to your father, curse to the men of Troy!"
So he taunted. Deiphobus' mind was torn—
should he pull back and call a friend to his side,
some hardy Trojan, or take the Argive on alone?
As he thought it out, the first way seemed the best.
He went for Aeneas, found him out on the flank
and fringe of battle, standing idle, forever
angered at Priam who always scrimped his honors,
brave as Aeneas was among the Trojan fighters.
Deiphobus reached him soon with winging words:
"Aeneas, captain, counselor, how we need you now!
Shield your sister's husband—if grief can touch your heart.
Follow me, fight for Alcathous, your brother-in-law
who reared you at home when you were just a boy.
The famous spearman Idomeneus cut him down."
Fighting words—
that began to stir the rage inside Aeneas' chest
and out for blood he charged Idomeneus now.
But nothing could make him panic-no green boy,
he stood his ground like a wild mountain boar,
trusting his strength, standing up to a rout of men
that scream and swoop against him off in a lonely copse,
the ridge of his back bristling, his eyes flashing fire,
he grinds his teeth, champing to beat back dogs and men.
So Idomeneus, famous speannan, stood his ground,
he never gave an inch with Aeneas charging in,
quick to the rescue. Idomeneus called his comrades,
glancing fast at Ascalaphus, Aphareus, Deipyrus,
Meriones and Antilochus, both strong with the war cry—
he called them closer, his winging orders flying:
"Over here, my friends! I'm all alone, defend me!
I fear Aeneas-terribly—coming on, top speed,
bearing down on me now and filled with power,
enormous power to take men down in battle.
He's just in the first flush of youth, what's more,
the greatest power of all. If we were the same age,
I tell you, just as the same fury fills us both—
at a single stroke he'd bear off glory now
or I'd bear it off myself!"
So the Cretan yelled
and all his comrades came in a pack with one will,
massing round him, bracing shields to shoulders.
But across the lines Aeneas called his comrades,
glancing fast at Deiphobus, Paris, brave Agenor,
all the Trojan captains who backed Aeneas here,
and fighters followed close behind like flocks
that follow the lead ram, leaving the pastureland
to drink at springs, and the shepherd's heart exults.
So now the heart of Aeneas leapt inside his chest
when he saw the flocks of fighters crowding in his wake.
Round Alcathous' corpse they lunged in hand-to-hand
with their long spears, and the bronze around their chests
clashed out, a terrific din as they struck each other fiercely,
the lines jamming and two fighters rearing above the rest,
Idomeneus and Aeneas, both a match for Ares, charged
with their ruthless bronze to hack each other's flesh.
Aeneas was first—he aimed and hurled at Idomeneus
but the Cretan saw it coming, dodged the brazen tip
and Aeneas' lance plunged in the earth, quivering,
his arm's power poured in a wasted shot.
Idomeneus—
he hurled and speared Oenomaus through the belly,
smashing his corslet just where the plates join
and the bronze spearhead spilled his entrails out
and down the Trojan crashed, grasping, clawing the dust.
Idomeneus wrenched his dark shaft from the corpse
but as for the dead man's burnished gear—no use.
The chief was helpless to rip it off his shoulders—
enemy weapons jolted him back with so much force
his legs buckled, the old driving power lost,
no dash left to dive for a spear or dodge one.
So there he stood, taking it all, beating away
the ruthless-day of death. No more running now,
no quick leaps to sweep him clear of the fighting,
just backing, step by step . . .
And Deiphobus taking aim
with his big glinting spear, forever hating the man
and he hurled and missed again—
but Deiphobus hit Ascalaphus with that shaft,
Ascalaphus son of the butcher god of battles—
the heavy spearshaft ran him through the shoulder
and down he thundered, scraping, clutching the dust.
But the giant bellowing Ares had heard nothing yet
of how his son went down in the mounting carnage.
On a crest of Olympus under golden clouds he sat,
the god of war held fast by the will of Zeus, aloof
where the other deathless gods were kept back from battle.
Still round Alcathous fighters kept on lunging in.
Deiphobus stripped away the corpse's gleaming helmet
but quick as the god of war Meriones leapt at him,
stabbed his outstretched arm and the blank-eyed helmet
slipped from his grasp, pounding the ground and clanging.
Meriones back on attack—a savage swoop like a vulture—
yanked the spear from the Trojan's shoulder joint
and back he drew into crowds of waiting troops.
But Polites swept up close to Deiphobus' side,
caught his brother around the waist with both arms
and dragged him clear of the heartbreaking skirmish,
far downfield till they reached his team of racers
standing behind the rear lines and rush of battle,
their driver and handsome chariot held in tow . . .
Then back to Troy they bore Deiphobus, groaning hard,
in agony, blood from his fresh wound pouring down his arm.
And still the rest fought on, relentless war cries rising.
Aeneas charging Aphareus, son of Caletor, slit open
his throat just turning toward Aeneas' ripping blade—
his head slumped to the side, shield crushing in on him,
helmet too, and courage-shattering death engulfed his corpse.
Next Antilochus, watching Thoon veer for a quick escape,
sprang and stabbed him, slashing away the whole vein
that runs the length of the back to reach the neck—
he severed it, sheared it clear
and the man went sprawling, back flat in the dust
and stretching out both hands to his friends-in-arms.
Antilochus closed to tear the gear from his shoulders,
glancing left and right as Trojans massed against him,
plunging from every side to batter down his shield
but they could not pierce that broad glistening hide—
no scoring his tender young flesh with ruthless bronze.
Not Antilochus, guarded now by the god of earthquakes
shielding, ringing the son of Nestor round, even in this,
this storm of spears. Antilochus never clear of enemies,
always wheeling, bracing to face them, his own spear
never resting, always brandished, quivering tense,
his courage primed to cut men down with a hurl
or charge them face-to-face.
His spear aimed in the melee—
but Adamas, Asius' son missed nothing, he saw it all,
rushed him, rammed Antilochus' buckler dead center
with sharp bronze but the blue-haired god Poseidon
crushed the spear, denied him the Argive's life.
Half his lance hung there in Antilochus' shield
like a charred stake, half dropped to the ground.
And back he shrank to his cohorts, dodging death
but hounding him as he went Meriones speared him
between the genitals and the navel-hideous wound,
the worst the god of battles deals to wretched men.
There the spear stuck. Hugging the shaft he writhed,
gasping, shuddering like some wild bull in the hills
that herdsmen shackle, trapping the beast with twisted ropes
and he fights them all the way as the men drag him off—
so he gasped with his wound. A little, not for long.
Till the hero Meriones moved in where he sprawled,
wrenched the spear from his corpse
and the dark came shrouding down across his eyes.
Helenus charged Deipyrus, cleft the side of his head
with a massive Thracian sword, smashed his helmet
and knocked it off. It fell to earth and an Argive
snatched it up as it rolled at soldiers' feet—
and the night came blinding down Deipyrus' eyes.
And anguish seized Menelaus lord of the war cry.
He went on the run at the fighting prophet Helenus,
all menace, madly shaking his whetted javelin
just as Helenus seized his bow by the handgrip.
Both let fly at each other, one launching out
with a sharp lance, one a shaft from the string—
and Helenus' arrow hit Atrides right on the chest,
on the breastplate's curve but the arrow sprang away.
High as the black-skin beans and chickpeas bounce and leap
from a big bladed shovel, flying across the threshing floor,
sped by a whistling wind and a winnower's sweeping stroke—
so the arrow flew from fighting Atrides' breastplate,
the keen shaft glancing, skittering off downfield.
But the lord of the war cry aimed for Helenus' hand
gripping his polished bow-and clean through his fist
the bronze spearhead drove and cracked the tensed weapon.
Back he fell to his massed companions, dodging death,
his hand dangling, dragging the long ashen shaft.
And gallant Agenor drew the spear from his hand
and bound it up in a band of tightly twisted wool,
a sling his aide retained for the good commander.
And now Pisander rushed Menelaus famed in arms
but a grim fate was rushing him to the stroke of death—
to be crushed in this hell of war by you, Menelaus.
Just as the two men closed, heading into each other,
Attides missed-his spearshaft hooking off to the side—
Pisander stabbed his shield but the bronze could not bore through—
the huge hide blocked it, the shaft snapped at the socket.
Still the Trojan exulted, wild with hopes of triumph
as Menelaus, drawing his sword with silver studs,
leapt at Pisander, who clutched beneath his shield
his good bronze ax with its cleaving blade
set on a long smooth olive haft—
A clash!
Both fighters at one great stroke
chopped at each other-Pisander hacked the horn
of the horsehair-crested helmet right at its ridge,
lunging as Menelaus hacked Pisander between the eyes,
the bridge of the nose, and bone cracked, blood sprayed
and both eyes dropped at his feet to mix in the dust—
he curled and crashed. Digging a heel in his chest
Menelaus stripped his gear and vaunted out in glory,
"So home you'll run from our racing ships, by god,
all as corpses—see, you death-defying Trojans?
Never sated with shattering war cries, are you?
Nor do you lack the other brands of outrage,
all that shame you heaped on me, you rabid dogs!
No fear in your hearts for the quaking rage of Zeus,
the thundering god of host and welcome stranger—
one day he'll raze your lofty city for you.
You Trojans who stole away my wedded wife
and hoards of riches too—for no reason, none—
my queen of the realm who hosted you with kindness.
And now you rampage on among our deep-sea ships,
wild to torch our hulls and kill our heroes-well,
you'll be stopped, somewhere, mad as you are for combat!
Zeus, Father Zeus, they say you excel all others . . .
all men and gods, in wisdom clear and calm—
but all this brutal carnage comes from you.
Look how you favor them, these reckless Trojans,
their fury always in uproar—no one can ever slake
their thirst for blood, for the great leveler, war!
One can achieve his fill of all good things,
even of sleep, even of making love . . .
rapturous song and the beat and sway of dancing.
A man will yearn for his fill of all these joys
before his fill of war. But not these Trojans—
no one can glut their lust for battle!"
So he cried
and staunch Atrides stripped the gear from the corpse
and heaving the bloody bronze to eager comrades
swung to attack again, frontline assault.
There—
Harpalion charged Menelaus—King Pylaemenes' son
who'd followed his father into war at Troy
but he never reached his fatherland again.
He closed on Atrides, spear stabbing his. shield
right on the boss but the bronze could not drive through,
so back he drew to his ranks, dodging death, glancing
left and right, fearing a lance would graze his flesh.
But Meriones caught him in full retreat, he let fly
with a bronze-tipped arrow, hitting his right buttock
up under the pelvic bone so the lance pierced the bladder.
He sank on the spot, hunched in his dear companion's arms,
gasping out his life as he writhed along the ground
like an earthworm stretched out in death, blood pooling,
soaking the earth dark red. Hardy Paphlagonians,
working over him, hoisting him onto a chariot,
bore him back to the sacred walls of Troy.. .
deep in grief while his father, weeping freely,
walked beside them now. No blood-price came his way.
Not for his son who breathed his last in battle.
But Paris flared in rage at his comrade's death,
his friend and guest among all the Paphlagonians.
Incensed, he let loose with a bronze-tipped arrow
aimed at one Euchenor, son of the prophet Polyidus,
a decent, wealthy man who made his home in Corinth.
Well Euchenor knew that boarding the ships for Troy
meant certain death: his father told him so . . .
Time and again the strong old prophet said
he'd die in his own halls of a fatal plague
or go with the ships and die at Trojan hands.
So off Euchenor sailed, both to save his wealth
from the heavy fine the Argives made deserters pay
and himself from wasting illness—no slow plague for him.
Suddenly Paris struck him under the jaw and ear—
and life flew from his limbs
and the hateful darkness had him in its grip.
The rest fought on like a mass of whirling fire.
But Hector dear to Zeus had no idea, Hector
heard nothing of how his men, left of the ships,
were torn and mauled in the Argives' rough response.
The glory might even have gone to them at any moment,
so intent was the god who grips and shakes the earth
as he surged his Argives on and the god surged too,
adding his own immortal force in their defense.
But Hector kept on driving too just at the point
where he first broke through the gates and wall he charged,
he smashed the Achaean lines, dense with armed men,
there where Protesilaus' and giant Ajax' ships
lay hauled up in the breaking, churning surf
and the wall to landward dipped low to the ground,
the weakest point where the fiercest fighting raged—
waves of Trojans, Trojan horse in assault.
Bulked against them,
Boeotian troops, Ionian troops with their long war-shirts,
Locrians, Phthians and men of Epea famed in battle
fought to stop this Hector hurtling at the ships.
Nothing they did could thrust him off their lines,
Prince Hector roaring on like a torch—not even
the picked Athenians led by Menestheus, Peteos' son
and backing him came Phidas, Stichius, brave Bias,
then the Epean units led by Meges, Phyleus' son,
Amphion, Dracius, and leading the Phthian ranks
came Medon flanking Podarces tough in skirmish.
Medon the bastard son of royal King Oileus,
Little Ajax' brother, but Medon lived in Phylace,
banished from native land—he'd killed a kinsman
dear to Oileus' wife, his stepmother Eriopis—
but Iphiclus son of Phylacus bore Podarces . . .
Brothers-in-arms, he and Medon led the Phthians,
out in the forefront of those gallant soldiers
fighting beside Boeotians now to save the ships.
But Oileus' son the racing Ajax—not for a moment,
not at all would he leave his giant brother Ajax,
shoulder-to-shoulder they fought together here:
close as a brace of wine-dark oxen matched in power,
dragging a bolted plow through packed fallow land
and the sweat rushes up at the roots of both their horns
and only the width of polished yoke keeps both beasts apart,
struggling up the furrow to cut the field's last strip.
So both men stood their ground, bracing man-to-man
and a flock of comrades, hardened combat veterans
followed the Great Ajax, ready to take his shield
whenever sweat and labor sapped his knees.
But no Locrians followed the hearty Little Ajax.
They had no love for stand-and-fight encounters—
had no crested bronze helmets to guard their heads,
no balanced shields in their grasp, no ashen spears,
only their bows and slings of springy, twisted wool.
Trusting these, they followed their chief to Troy,
shooting with these, salvo on pelting salvo,
they tore the Trojan battle lines to pieces.
So the men in heavy armor fought at the front,
they grappled Trojans and Hector helmed in bronze
while Locrians slung from the rear, safe, .out of range,
till the Trojan troops forgot their lust for blood
as showering arrows raked their ranks with panic.
Deadly going—
then and there the Trojans might have been rolled back,
far away from the ships and tents to wind-tom Troy
if Polydamas had not rushed to headstrong Hector:
"Impossible man! Won't you listen to reason?
Just because some god exalts you in battle
you think you can beat the rest at tactics too.
How can you hope to garner all the gifts at once?
One man is a splendid fighter—a god has made him so—
one's a dancer, another skilled at lyre and song,
and deep in the next man's chest farseeing Zeus
plants the gift of judgment, good clear sense.
And many reap the benefits of that treasure:
troops of men he saves, as he himself knows best.
So now I will tell you what seems best to me. Look,
the battle bums like a swirling crown around your head
but our valiant Trojans, once they scaled the wall—
some fall back from the front, idling in armor,
others soldier on, squads against mass formations,
scattering helter-skelter round the hulls.
Draw back now!
Call the best of our captains here, this safe ground.
Then we can all fall in and plan our tactics well:
whether we fling ourselves against the ships—
if Zeus would care to hand us victory now—
or beat retreat from the beach and cut our losses.
I fear they'll pay us back for yesterday's triumph.
He waits by the ships, a man never sated with battle . . .
I doubt he'll keep from the fighting any longer,
not with all his war-lust!"
So he urged. His plan won Hector over—
less danger, more success—and down he leapt
from his chariot fully armed and hit the ground,
calling out to Polydamas brisk, winged orders:
"You stay here, hold back our captains here.
I'm on my way over there to meet this new assault—
I'll soon be back, once I've given them clear commands."
And out like a flashing snowcapped peak he moved,
shouting, sweeping on through his ranks and Trojan allies.
Squads of others swarmed and rallied around Polydamas,
Panthous' friendly son—they'd heard Hector's orders.
But Hector ranged the front to find his leaders,
hunting Deiphobus and the rugged warlord Helenus,
Adamas, Asius' son, and Asius son of Hyrtacus.
Where could he find them now? Find them he did,
no longer free of wounds, unhurt—not at all . . .
Adamas, Asius, both sprawled at Achaea's stems,
dead at the Argives' hands. The others at home,
behind the walls, were gouged by shaft or sword.
But he quickly found one more, on the left flank
of the heart-wrenching carnage-royal Paris,
fair-haired Helen's consort was rousing comrades,
driving them back to battle. Once he gained his side
Hector raked his brother with insults, stinging taunts:
"Paris, appalling Paris! Our prince of beauty—
mad for women, you lure them all to ruin!
Where's Deiphobus? Helenus, rugged warlord?
Adamas, Asius' son, and Asius son of Hyrtacus—
where's Othryoneus, tell me.
Now all towering Troy is ruined top to bottom!
Now one thing's certain—your own headlong death!"
And Paris, magnificent as a god, replied,
"Hector, bent on faulting a man without a fault?
At other times I might have shrunk from the fighting,
true, but not today. Mother bore me-even me—
not to be a coward through and through. Think,
since you fired our comrades' fury against the ships,
from that hour we've held our ground right here,
taking the Argives on, and nonstop, no rest.
Our comrades are dead, Hector,
those you inquire about with such concern . . .
Only Deiphobus and the rugged warlord Helenus
have made it back alive, wounded with sturdy spears,
both in the hand too, but Zeus beat off their deaths.
Now lead the way, wherever your fighting spirit bids you.
All of us right behind you, hearts intent on battle.
Nor do I think you'll find us short on courage,
long as our strength will last. Past his strength
no man can go, though he's set on mortal combat."
That brought his brother's warrior spirit round.
On they went where the thickest fighting broke,
churning round Cebriones, dauntless Polydamas,
Phalces, Orthaeus and veteran Polyphetes,
Palmys, Hippotion's two, sons-Ascanius, Morys—
fresh reserves just come from Ascania's fertile soil,
just last morning, but now great Zeus incited all-out war.
Down the Trojans came like a squall of brawling gale-winds
blasting down with the Father's thunder, loosed on earth
and a superhuman uproar bursts as they pound the heavy seas,
the giant breakers seething, battle lines of them roaring,
shoulders rearing, exploding foam, waves in the vanguard,
waves rolling in from the rear. So on the Trojans came,
waves in the vanguard, waves from the rear, closing,
bronze men glittering, following captains, closing
and Hector led the way, a match for murderous Ares—
Priam's son holding his balanced shield before him,
tough with oxhides, studded thick with bronze
and round his temples the flashing helmet shook.
He plowed forward, testing enemy lines at all points
to see if they'd crack before him-charging under his shield
but he could not overpower the Argives' stiff resolve
and Ajax hulking forward with big strides, the first
to challenge Hector: "Madman! Here, come closer—
trying to frighten Argives? Why waste your breath?
No, no, it's not that we lack the skill in battle,
it's just the brutal lash of Zeus that beats us down.
Your hopes soar, I suppose, to gut and crush our ships?
Well we have strong arms too, arms to defend those ships—
and long before that your city packed with people
will fall beneath our hands, plundered to rubble.
And you, I say, the day draws near when off you run
and pray to Father Zeus and the other deathless gods
to make your full-maned horses swifter than hawks—
whipping dust from the plain to sweep you back to Troy!"
Clear on the right a bird winged past to seal those words,
a soaring eagle swooping. Spirits high with the sign,
the Argive armies cheered. But bent on glory
Hector answered the giant Ajax taunt for taunt:
"Enough of your blustering threats, you clumsy ox—
what loose talk, what rant!
I wish I were as surely the son of storming Zeus
for all my days—and noble Hera gave me birth
and I were prized as they prize Athena and Apollo—
as surely as this day will bring your Argives death,
down to the last man. And you will die with the rest.
If you have the daring to stand against my heavy spear
its point will rip your soft warm skin to shreds!
Then, then you'll glut the dogs and birds of Troy
with your fat and flesh—cut down by the beaked ships!"
And loosing a savage yell, Hector led the way
and his captains followed close with unearthly cries
and Trojan ranks behind them crying shrill.
But facing them the Achaean ranks cried back,
not forgetting their courage, braced hard for assault
as the Trojans' bravest charged and roars from both armies
struck the high clear skies, the lightning world of Zeus.
But the mounting cries of war could not escape old Nestor,
pausing over his wine. He turned to Asclepius' son
with an urgent, winged word:
"Think, noble Machaon, what shall we do now?
The cries are fiercer-fighters beside the ships!
You sit here, keep drinking the shining wine now,
till well-kempt Hecamede draws you a warm bath,
steaming hot, and washes away that clotted blood.
But I am off to a lookout point to learn the truth."
With that he seized the well-wrought shield of his son,
Thrasymedes breaker of horses—it lay in a comer,
all glowing bronze, while the boy used his father's.
Gripping a sturdy spear, bronze-edged and sharp,
he no sooner left his tent than stopped at once—
what a grim, degrading piece of work he saw.
Friends routed, enemies harrying friends in panic,
the Trojans riding high—the Argive wall in ruins.
Nestor stood there, stunned.
As a huge ground swell boils up on the open seas,
soundless, foreboding a hurricane's howling onslaught,
rearing but never rolling back or forth . . . all adrift
till one steady, decisive blast comes down from Zeus—
so the old man thrashed things out, tom two ways,
to join his Argives fast with chariot-teams
or go and find Agamemnon lord of armies.
His mind in turmoil, this way seemed the best:
he'd head for Atreus' son. But other soldiers
kept on flailing, cutting each other to pieces,
the tough bronze casing their bodies clanging out,
fighters stabbing with swords, flinging two-edged spears.
And now the royal kings fell in with Nestor.
Back they came, trailing along the shipways,
all who had taken wounds from the sharp bronze,
Diomedes, Odysseus, and Atreus' son Agamemnon.
Their ships were drawn up far away from the fighting,
moored in a group along the gray churning surf—
first ships ashore they'd hauled up on the plain
then built a defense to landward off their stems.
Not even the stretch of beach, broad as it was,
could offer berths to all that massed armada,
troops were crammed in a narrow strip of coast.
So they had hauled their vessels inland, row on row,
while the whole shoreline filled and the bay's gaping mouth
enclosed by the jaws of the two jutting headlands.
Now up they came for a better view of the battle,
a slow file of kings, leaning on their spears,
hearts in their chests weighed down with anguish—
and the sight of the old horseman coming toward them
struck them all with a sharper, sense of dread.
The king of men Agamemnon hailed him quickly:
"Nestor, son of Neleus, great pride of Achaea,
why turn your back on the lines where men are dying?
Why come back here to shore? I'm filled with fear
that breakneck Hector will bring his word to pass—
the threat he hurled against me once in a Trojan muster
that he would never leave our ships and return to Troy
till he'd torched our hulls and slaughtered all our men.
That was the prince's threat . . .
and now, look, by god, it all comes to pass!
How shameful—and now the rest of our men-at-arms
must harbor anger against me deep inside their hearts,
just like Achilles. And they have no stomach left
to fight to the end against the warships' stems."
The noble old horseman could only bear him out:
"True, too true. A disaster's right upon us.
Not even thundering Zeus himself could turn the tide.
The rampart's down, there, the great wall we trusted,
our impregnable shield for the ships and men themselves.
The enemy storms down on the rolling hulls nonstop,
desperate, life or death. Hard as you scan the lines,
there's no more telling from which side we're harried—
carnage left and right. Death-cries hit the skies!
Put heads together—what shall we do now?—
if strategy's any use. Struggle's clearly not.
The last thing I'd urge is to throw ourselves into battle.
How on earth can a wounded man make war?"
So the lord of men Agamemnon staged the action:
"Since they are fighting against the stems, old friend,
and the wall we built is useless, the trench a waste
where our Argive forces took such heavy losses .
always hoping against hope it was indestructible,
our impregnable shield for ships and men themselves—
so it must please the Father's overweening heart
to kill the Achaeans here, our memory blotted out
a world away from Argos! I knew it then,
even when Zeus defended us with all his might,
and I know it now, when he glorifies these Trojans—
He lifts them high as the blessed deathless gods
but ties our hands and lames our fighting spirit.
So come, follow my orders. All obey me now.
All vessels beached on the front along the shore—
haul them- down and row them out on the bright sea,
ride them over the anchor-stones in the offshore swell
till the bracing godsent night comes down and then,
if the Trojans will. refrain from war at night,
we haul down all the rest. No shame in running,
fleeing disaster, even in pitch darkness.
Better to flee from death than feel its grip."
With a dark glance the shrewd tactician. Odysseus
wheeled on his commander: "What's this, Atrides,
this talk that slips from your clenched teeth?
You are the disaster.
Would to god you commanded another army,
a ragtag crew of cowards, instead of ruling us,
the men whom Zeus decrees, from youth to old age,
must wind down our brutal wars to the bitter end
until we drop and die, down to the last man.
So this is how you'd bid farewell to Troy,
yearning to kiss her broad streets good-bye—
Troy that cost our comrades so much grief?
Quiet!
What if one of the men gets wind of your brave plan?
No one should ever let such nonsense pass his lips,
no one with any skill in fit and proper speech—
and least of all yourself, a sceptered king.
Full battalions hang on your words, Agamemnon—
look at the countless loyal fighters you command!
Now where's your sense? You fill me with contempt—
what are you saying? With the forces poised to clash
you tell us to haul our oar-swept vessels out to sea?
Just so one more glory can crown these Trojans—
god help us, they have beaten us already—
and the scales of headlong death can drag us down.
Achaean troops will never hold the line, I tell you,
not while the long ships are being hauled to sea.
They'll look left and right-where can they run?—
and fling their lust for battle to the winds. Then,
commander of armies, your plan will kill us all!"
At that the king of men Agamemnon backed down:
"A painful charge, Odysseus, straight to the heart.
I am hardly the man to order men, against their will,
to haul the oar-swept vessels out to sea. So now,
whoever can find a better plan, let him speak up,
young soldier or old. I would be pleased to hear him."
And Diomedes lord of the war cry stepped forward,
"Here is your man. Right here, not far to seek.
If you'll only hear me out and take my lead,
not glare at me in resentment, each of you,
since I am the youngest-born in all our ranks.
I too have a noble birth to boast-my father,
Tydeus, mounded over now by the earth of Thebes.
Three brave sons were bom of the loins of Portheus:
they made their homes in Pleuron and craggy Calydon,
Agrius first, then Melas, the horseman Oeneus third,
my father's father, the bravest of them all.
There Oeneus stayed, on his own native soil,
but father wandered far, driven to live in Argos . . .
by the will of Zeus, I suppose, and other deathless gods.
He married one of Adrastus' daughters, settled down
in a fine wealthy house, with plenty of grainland
ringed with row on row of blooming orchards
and pastures full of sheep, his own herds.
And he excelled all Argives with his spear—
you must have heard the story, know it's true.
So you cannot challenge my birth as low, cowardly,
or spurn the advice I give, if the plan is really sound.
I say go back to the fighting, wounded as we are—
we must, we have no choice. But once at the front,
hold off from the spear-play, out of range ourselves
since who of us wants to double wounds on wounds?
But we can spur the rest of them into battle,
all who had nursed some private grudge before,
kept to the rear and shunned the grueling forays."
The others listened closely and fell in line,
moving out, and marshal Agamemnon led them on.
But the famous god of earthquakes was not blind.
No, Poseidon kept his watch and down he came
to the file of kings like an old veteran now,
he tugged at the right hand of Atreus' son
and sent his message flying: "Agamemnon—
now, by heaven, Achilles' murderous spirit
must be leaping in his chest, filled with joy
to behold his comrades slain and routed in their blood.
That man has got no heart in him, not a pulsebeat.
So let him die, outright—let a god wipe him out!
But with you the blessed gods are not enraged,
not through and through, Agamemnon . . .
A day will come when the Trojan lords and captains
send an immense dust storm swirling down the plain—
with your own eyes you'll see them break for Troy,
leaving -your ships and shelters free and clear!"
A shattering cry, and he surged across the plain,
thundering loud as nine, ten thousand combat soldiers
shriek with Ares' fury when massive armies clash-so huge
that voice the god of the earthquake let loose from his lungs,
planting enormous martial power in each Achaean's heart
to urge the battle on, to fight and never flinch.
Now Hera poised on her golden throne looked down,
stationed high at her post aloft Olympus' peak.
At once she saw the sea lord blustering strong
in the war where men win glory, her own brother
and husband's brother too, and her heart raced with joy.
But then she saw great Zeus at rest on the ridge
and the craggy heights of Ida gushing cold springs
and her heart filled with loathing. What could she do?—
Queen Hera wondered, her eyes glowing wide . . .
how could she outmaneuver Zeus the mastermind,
this Zeus with his battle-shield of storm and thunder?
At last one strategy struck her mind as best:
she would dress in all her glory and go to Ida—
perhaps the old desire would overwhelm the king
to lie by her naked body and make immortal love
and she might drift an oblivious, soft warm sleep
across his eyes and numb that seething brain.
So off she went to her room,
the chamber her loving son Hephaestus built her,
hanging the doors from doorposts snug and tight,
locked with a secret bolt no other god could draw.
She slipped in, closing the polished doors behind her.
The ambrosia first..Hera cleansed her enticing body
of any blemish, then she applied a deep olive rub,
the breath-taking, redolent oil she kept beside her . . .
one stir of the scent in the bronze-floored halls of Zeus
and a perfumed cloud would drift from heaven down to earth.
Kneading her skin with this to a soft glow and combing her hair,
she twisted her braids with expert hands, and sleek, luxurious,
shining down from her deathless head they fell, cascading.
Then round her shoulders she swirled the wondrous robes
that Athena wove her, brushed out to a high gloss
and worked into the weft an elegant rose brocade.
She pinned them across her breasts with a golden brooch
then sashed her waist with a waistband
floating a hundred tassels, and into her earlobes,
neatly pierced, she quickly looped her earrings,
ripe mulberry-clusters dangling in triple drops
and the silver glints they cast could catch the heart.
Then back over her brow she draped her headdress,
fine fresh veils for Hera the queen of gods,
their pale, glimmering sheen like a rising sun,
and under her smooth feet she fastened supple sandals.
Now, dazzling in all her rich regalia, head to foot,
out of her rooms she strode and beckoned Aphrodite
away from the other gods and whispered, "Dear child,
would you do me a favor . . . whatever I might ask?
Or would you refuse me, always fuming against me
because I defend the Argives, you the Trojans?"
Aphrodite the daughter of Zeus replied at once,
"Hera, queen of the skies, daughter of mighty Cronus,
tell me what's on your mind. I am eager to do it—
whatever I can do . . . whatever can be done."
Quick with treachery noble Hera answered,
"Give me Love, give me Longing now, the powers
you use to overwhelm all gods and mortal men!
I am off to the ends of the fruitful, teeming earth
to visit Ocean, fountainhead of the gods, and Mother Tethys
who nourished me in their halls and reared me well.
They received me from Rhea, when thundering Zeus
drove Cronus under the earth and the barren salt sea.
I go to visit them and dissolve their endless feud—
how long they have held back from each other now,
from making love, since anger struck their hearts.
But if words of mine could lure them back to love,
back to bed, to lock in each other's arms once more . . .
they would call me their honored, loving friend forever."
Aphrodite, smiling her everlasting smile, replied,
"Impossible—worse, it's wrong to deny your warm request,
since you are the one who lies in the arms of mighty Zeus."
With that she loosed from her breasts the breastband,
pierced and alluring, with every kind of enchantment
woven through it . . . There is the heat of Love,
the pulsing rush of Longing, the lover's whisper,
irresistible—magic to make the sanest man go mad.
And thrusting it into Hera's outstretched hands
she breathed her name in a throbbing, rising voice:
"Here now, take this band, put it between your breasts—
ravishing openwork, and the world lies in its weaving!
You won't return, I know, your mission unfulfilled,
whatever your eager heart desires to do."
Hera broke into smiles now, her eyes wide—
with a smile she tucked the band between her breasts.
And Aphrodite the daughter of Zeus went home
but Hera sped in a flash from Mount Olympus' peak
and crossing Pieria's coast and lovely Emathia
rushed on, over the Thracian riders' snowy ridges,
sweeping the highest summits, feet never touching the earth
and east of Athos skimmed the billowing, foaming sea
and touched down on Lemnos, imperial Thoas' city.
There she fell in with Sleep, twin brother of Death,
clung to his hand and urged him, called his name:
"Sleep, master of all gods and all mortal men,
if you ever listened to me in the old days,
do what I ask you now—
and you shall have my everlasting thanks.
Put Zeus to sleep for me! Seal his shining eyes
as soon as I've gone to bed with, him, locked in love,
and I will give you gifts-a magnificent throne,
never tarnished, always glittering, solid gold.
My own son Hephaestus, the burly crippled Smith
will forge it finely and under it slide a stool
where you can prop your glistening feet and rest,
stretching out at feasts."
And the voice of Sleep
the soft and soothing drifted back . . . "Hera, Hera,
queen of the gods and daughter of mighty Cronus—
any other immortal god who lives forever,
believe me, I would put to sleep in a wink,
even the rolling tides of the great Ocean River,
the fountainhead that brought them all to birth.
But Zeus? Not I—I would not get too close
to the son of Cronus, much less put him under,
not unless the Father gave the command himself.
A commission of yours taught me my lesson once,
the day that Heracles, the insolent son of Zeus
sailed out from Troy, having razed her to the ground.
And then I put the brain of thundering Zeus to sleep,
pouring myself in a soft, soothing slumber round him.
But you and your anger! You were bent on.trouble,
whipping a howling killer-squall across the sea,
bearing Heracles off to the crowded town of Cos,
far from all his friends. But Zeus woke up,
furious, flinging immortal gods about his house
to hunt for me—I was the culprit, the worst of all—
and out of the skies he would have sunk me in the sea,
wiped me from sight, if the Night had failed to save me,
old Night that can overpower all gods and mortal men.
I reached her in flight and Father called it quits
despite his towering anger. True, Zeus shrank
from doing a thing to outrage rushing Night.
But now you are back, Hera—
you ask me to do the impossible once again."
Eyes widening, noble Hera coaxed him further:
"So troubled, Sleep, why torture yourself with that?
You think that thundering Zeus, shielding the men of Troy,
will rage as he raged for great Heracles, his own son?
Come now, I will give you one of the younger Graces—
Wed her at once and she'll be called your wife."
"On with it!"—Sleep cried, thrilled by the offer—
"Swear to me by the incorruptible tides of Styx,
one hand grasping the earth that feeds mankind,
the other the bright sea, that all may be our witness,
all gods under earth that gather round King Cronus!
Swear you will give me one of the younger Graces,
Pasithea, she's the one—
all my days I've tossed and turned for her!"
The white-armed goddess Hera complied at once.
She swore as he urged and sounded out the names
of all the gods in the Tartarean Pit we call the Titans.
As soon as she'd sworn and sealed her binding oath,
away they launched from Imbros' walls and Lemnos,
swathed in a thick mist and nimbly made their way
until they reached Mount Ida with all her springs,
the mother of wild beasts, and making Lectos headland,
left the sea for the first time and swept over dry land
as the treetops swayed and shook beneath their feet.
There Sleep came to a halt—
before the eyes of the Father could detect him—
and climbed up softly into a towering pine tree.
The tallest trunk there was on the heights of Ida,
it pierced the low-hung mist and shot up through the sky.
There he nestled,, hidden deep in the needling boughs,
for all the world like the bird with a shrill cry,
the mountain bird the immortals call Bronze Throat
and mortals call the Nighthawk.
But not Hera—
quick on her feet she scaled Gargaron peak,
the highest crest of Ida. And Zeus spotted her now,
Zeus who gathers the breasting clouds. And at one glance
the lust came swirling over him, making his heart race,
fast as the first time—all unknown to their parents—
they rolled in bed, they locked and surged in love.
He rose before her now, he savored her name:
"Hera—where are you rushing?
What wild desire brings you here from Olympus?
Where are the team and car you always ride?"
And filled with guile the noble Hera answered,
"I am off to the ends of the fruitful, teeming earth
to visit Ocean, fountainhead of the gods, and Mother Tethys
who nourished me in their halls and reared me well . . .
I go to visit them and dissolve their endless feud—
how long they have held back from each other now,
from making love, since anger struck their hearts.
My team stands at the foot of Ida with all her springs,
they wait to bear me over the good dry land and sea.
But now it is you, you I have come to visit, Zeus—
speeding here from the heights of Mount Olympus,
afraid you'll flare in anger against me later
if I should go in secret toward the halls
of the deep, flowing Ocean."
"Why hurry, Hera?"—
Zeus who gathers the breasting clouds replied,
"that is a journey you can make tomorrow. Now—
come, let's go to bed, let's lose ourselves in love!
Never has such a lust for goddess or mortal woman
flooded my pounding heart and overwhelmed me so.
Not even then, when I made love to Ixion's wife
who bore me Pirithous, rival to all the gods in wisdom . . .
not when I loved Acrisius' daughter Danae—marvelous ankles—
and Perseus sprang to life and excelled all men alive . . .
not when I stormed Europa, far-famed Phoenix' daughter
who bore me Minos and Rhadamanthys grand as gods . . .
not even Semele, not even Alcmena queen of Thebes
who bore me a son, that lionheart, that Heracles,
and Semele bore Dionysus, ecstasy, joy to mankind—
not when I loved Demeter, queen of the lustrous braids—
not when I bedded Leto ripe for glory—
Not even you!
That was nothing to how I hunger for you now—
irresistible longing lays me low!"
Teeming with treachery noble Hera led him on:
"Dread majesty, son of Cronus, what are you saying?
You are eager for bed now, burning to make love,
here on Ida's heights for all the world to see?
What if one of the deathless gods observes us,
sleeping together, yes—
and runs off to the rest and points us out to all?
I have no desire to rise from a bed like that
and steal back home to your own high halls—
think of the shocking scandal there would be!
But if you're on fire, overflowing with passion,
there's always your own bedroom. Hephaestus built it,
your own dear son, and the doors fit snug and tight . . .
There we can go to bed at once—since love is now your pleasure!"
And Zeus who gathers the breasting clouds assured her,
"Hera—nothing to fear, no god or man will see us—
I will wrap us round in a golden cloud so dense
not even the Sun's rays, the sharpest eyes in the world,
will pierce the mist and glimpse us making love!"
With that the son of Cronus caught his wife in his arms
and under them now the holy earth burst with fresh green grass,
crocus and hyacinth, clover soaked with dew, so thick and soft
it lifted their bodies off the hard, packed ground . . .
Folded deep in that bed they lay and round them wrapped
a marvelous cloud of gold, and glistening showers of dew
rained down around them both.
And, so, deep in peace,
the Father slept on Gargaron peak, conquered by Sleep
and strong assaults of Love, his wife locked in his arms.
Soothing Sleep went rushing off to the ships at once,
running a message to Poseidon. Approaching the god
who shakes the earth, Sleep sent a winged urging:
"Fight for the Argives now with all your might!
Now give them glory, if only a moment's glory—
long as Zeus still slumbers. I've covered him over,
sent him into a deep, soothing sleep as soon as Hera
seduced great Zeus to lose himself in love."
With that
Sleep went drifting off to the famous tribes of men,
stirring Poseidon even more to defend the Argives.
He suddenly sprang forward, into the front ranks,
the god's voice rippling strong: "Again, you Argives?
You're handing victory over to Hector, Priam's son,
so he can seize the ships and reap the glory?
That's his hope, his prayer, thanks to Achilles,
ironbound by the ships and filled with anger still.
But Achilles won't be missed so sorely, not a bit,
if the rest of us can rouse and defend each other.
So come, follow my orders. All obey me now.
Gear up with the best and biggest shields in camp
and encase our heads in helmets, burnished, fire-bright
and take in hand the longest javelins we can find—
then in for attack! And I, I will lead the way
and the son of Priam won't stand up against us,
not for long, I tell you, not for all his fury.
Let any rugged fighter who shoulders a small buckler
pass it on to a weaker man—put on the bigger shield.
The men hung on his words and they obeyed at once.
And the kings themselves, overcoming their wounds,
arrayed them all in proper battle-order.
Diomedes, Odysseus, Atreus' son Agamemnon
ranged the ranks, made them exchange their armor.
The best men donned the best, the worst the worst
and soon as they strapped the bronze around their bodies,
out they moved and the god of earthquakes led them on,
grasping his terrible long sword in his massive hand,
the grip of power, the blade like a lightning flash.
There is no way in the world a man can meet its edge
and still survive the slashing—fear holds all men back.
But over against them glorious Hector ranged his Trojans . . .
and now they stretched the line of battle strangling tight,
the blue-haired god of the sea and Hector fired in arms,
he driving the Trojans, the god driving the Argives—
and a wild surf pounded the ships and shelters,
squadrons clashed with shattering war cries rising.
Not so loud the breakers bellowing out against the shore,
driven in from open sea by the North Wind's brutal blast,
not so loud the roar of fire whipped to a crackling blaze
rampaging into a mountain gorge, raging up through timber,
not so loud the gale that howls in the leafy crowns of oaks
when it hits its pitch of fury tearing branches down—
Nothing so loud as cries of Trojans, cries of Achaeans,
terrible war cries, armies storming against each other.
And shining Hector was first to hurl his spear—
at the giant Ajax veering into him, full face—
a direct hit! where two straps crossed his chest,
one for the shield, one for the silver-studded sword
but both flexed taut to guard his glistening skin.
Hector seethed in anger—his hurtling spear
and his whole arm's power poured in a wasted shot
and back in his massing ranks he shrank, dodging death.
But as Hector backed away Great Ajax seized a rock—
countless holding-stones for the fast trim ships
were rolling round among the fighters' feet—
he hoisted one and heaved it at Hector's chest
and struck him over the shield-rim, close to his throat
and the blow sent Hector whirling off like a whipping-top,
reeling round and round. As a huge oak goes down
at a stroke from Father Zeus, ripped up by the roots
and a grim reek of sulphur bursts forth from the trunk
and a passerby too close, looking on, loses courage—
the bolt of mighty Zeus is hell on earth—so in a flash,
for all his fighting power, Hector plunged in the dust,
his spear dropped from his fist, shield and helmet '
crushing in on him, bronze gear clashing round him.
And shouting squads of Achaeans raced in for the kill,
hoping to drag him off and hurling showers of spears
but none could stab or strike the lord of armies now.
Too fast for them, here was a ring of Trojan chiefs:
Aeneas, Polydamas and the royal prince Agenor,
Sarpedon the Lycians' captain, valiant Glaucus=
and all their troops spared nothing, pitching in,
bracing their thick bulging shields to cover Hector.
Comrades heaved him up and swept him clear of the fighting,
far downfield till they gained his team of racers
standing behind the rear lines and rush of battle,
their driver and blazoned chariot held in tow . . .
Then back to Troy they bore him, groaning hard.
But once they reached the ford where the river runs clear,
the strong, whirling Xanthus sprung of immortal Zeus,
they lifted him off his car and laid him down
on the level bank, splashing water over him.
Hector caught his breath and his eyes cleared,
he crouched down on his knees to vomit dark clots
then slumped back down, stretched on the ground again
and the world went black as night across his eyes.
The force of the blow still overwhelmed his senses.
But Argive units, spotting Hector in full retreat,
charged the Trojans harder, their lust for battle rising.
And first by far was Oileus' son, quick Little Ajax—
he lunged out and his spearhead skewered Satnius,
Enops' son the lithe nymph of the ford once bore
to Enops tending his flocks by Satniois' banks . . .
Now the renowned spearman Ajax rushed against him,
slashing him down the flank, knocking him backward—
Trojans and Argives swarming over him, out for blood.
Shaking a spear Polydamas moved in fast to the rescue,
Panthous' son lancing the right shoulder of Prothoenor,
Arielycus' son, and the heavy shaft impaled his upper arm—
he pitched in the dust, clawing the earth with both hands
and Polydamas shouted over him, wild with glory now:
"Here is another spear that leaps from my strong arm,
from Panthous' brave son, and hits its mark, by god!
It's found its home in an Argive's waiting flesh—
a crutch in his grip, I'd say,
as he trudges down now to the House of Death!"
The Argives rose in horror to hear that boast,
veteran Ajax most of all, the anger leapt inside him—
Prothoenor had dropped at the feet of Telamon's son.
Ajax suddenly spun a glinting spear at Polydamas,
fast, but the Trojan dodged black fate himself
with a quick spring to the side—
but Antenor's son Archelochus caught the shaft
for the gods had doomed that fighting man to death.
Ajax struck him right where the head and neckbone join,
the last link in the spine, he cut both tendons through
so the mouth and brow and nostrils hit the ground
before the shins and knees as the man dropped dead.
And now it was Ajax' turn to shout at brave Polydamas,
"Think it over, Polydamas, tell the truth, my friend—
a decent bargain, no? This man's body for Prothoenor'sl
No coward, to judge by his looks, no coward's stock,
no doubt some brother of stallion-breaking Antenor,
that or his own son—the blood-likeness is striking!"
So Ajax vaunted, knowing his victim full well,
and a raw revulsion seized the Trojans' hearts.
Straddling his brother, Acamas thrust and speared
Boeotian Promachus, trying to drag the corpse by the feet,
and Acamas loosed his cry of exultation, "Argives—
glorious braggarts, you, insatiate with your threats!
Don't think struggle and pain will be ours alone—
your day will come to die in blood like him.
Think how Promachus sleeps at your feet now,
beaten down by my spear—with no long wait
to pay the price for my brother dead and gone.
That's why a fighter prays for kin in his halls,
blood kin to survive and avenge his death in battle!"
But the Argives rose in grief to avenge that boast
skilled Peneleos most of all, anger blazed inside him.
He charged Acamas—Acamas could not stand the attack,
he ran—and Peneleos stabbed at Ilioneus instead,
a son of the herdsman Phorbas rich in flocks,
Hermes' favorite Trojan: Hermes gave him wealth
but Ilioneus' mother gave him just one son . . .
the one Peneleos lanced beneath the brows,
down to the eyes' roots and scooped an eyeball out—
the spear cut clean through the socket, out behind the nape
and backward down he sat, both hands stretched wide
as Peneleos, quickly drawing his whetted sword,
hacked him square in the neck and lopped his head
and down on the ground it tumbled, helmet and all.
But the big spear's point still stuck in the eye socket—
hoisting the head high like a poppy-head on the shaft
he flourished it in the eyes of all the Trojans now,
yelling out his boast: "Go tell them from me,
you Trojans, tell the loving father and mother
of lofty Ilioneus to start the dirges in the halls!
The wife of Promachus, Alegenor's son, will never thrill
to her dear husband striding home from the wars
that day the sons of Achaea sail from Troy!"
And the knees of every Trojan shook with fear,
each veteran frantic, glancing left and fight—
how to escape his sudden, plunging death?
Sing to me now, you Muses who hold the halls of Olympus,
who was the first Achaean to drag off bloody spoils
as the famous god of earthquakes turned the tide?
Telamonian Ajax first, Ajax brought down Hyrtius,
Gyrtius' son, a lord of the ironhearted Mysians.
Next Antilochus slaughtered Phalces, Mermerus—
Meriones killed off Morys, killed Hippotion,
Teucer cut down Periphetes and Prothoon.
Menelaus took the hardened captain Hyperenor,
gouged his flank and the bronze ripped him open,
spurting his entrails out—and his life, gushing forth
through the raw, yawning wound, went pulsing fast
and the dark came swirling down across his eyes.
But Oileus' son, quick Ajax killed the most—
no one alive could run men down in flight like him
once Zeus whipped enemy ranks in blinding, panic rout.
Back through jutting stakes and across the trench they fled,
and hordes were cut down at the Argives' hands-the rest,
only after they reached the chariots, stood fast,
blanched with fear, whipped in desperate flight.
That moment Zeus awoke on the heights of Ida,
stretched out by Hera, queen of the golden throne—
he leapt to his feet, he saw the Trojans and Achaeans,
one side routed, the other harrying them in panic,
Achaeans attacking, and god Poseidon led the way.
And Zeus saw Hector sprawled on the battlefield,
his comrades kneeling round him as he panted,
struggling hard for breath, his senses stunned,
vomiting blood . . . The man who'd struck him dowr
was not the weakest Argive. At the sight of Hector
the father of men and gods filled with pity now
and shooting a terrible dark glance down at Hera,
burst out at her, "What a disaster you create!
Uncontrollable Hera—you and your treachery—
halting Hector's assault and routing Hector's armies.
I wouldn't be surprised, my Queen, if you were the first
to reap the pernicious whirlwind you have sown—
I'll whip you stroke on stroke.
Don't you recall the time I strung you in mid-air
and slung those two massive anvils down from your feet
and lashed both hands with a golden chain you could not break?
There, there in the clouds and high clear sky you dangled.
And the mighty gods on steep Olympus raged away,
impotent—what could they do to set you free?
Standing there, helpless. And any god I caught
I'd seize and send him plunging over the ramparts,
headfirst till he hit the earth, barely alive.
Not even then would the stark grief for Heracles
release my breaking heart—my own godlike son . . .
You with the North Wind's help had coaxed the gales
to send him scudding over the barren salt sea—
you, always plotting miseries for my son,
you bore him off to the crowded town of Cos.
But there I saved him, whisked him away to safety,
back to the stallion-land of Argos, worn with torment.
I will help you remember—you'll give up your treacheries,
you will see if your warm embraces serve you then,
your bed of lust where you sank me in your arms.
Down from the gods you came to waylay me—
you seduced me blind."
Her eyes wide,
Queen Hera shuddered before his thunder,
protesting, swearing a flight of winged oaths:
"Earth be my witness now, the vaulting Sky above
and the dark cascading waters of the Styx—I swear
by the greatest, grimmest oath that binds the happy gods!
By your sacred head, by the bed of our own marriage
that I, at least, would never take in vain . . .
Never by will of mine did the god of earthquakes
wreak havoc among the Trojan ranks and Hector
and surge to help their foes!  I
It must be his own great rage that drives him on—
he pitied the sight of Argives pinned against their ships.
Not I . . . why, I'd be the first to counsel him
to take your lead, Zeus, wherever you command,
my king of the black cloud!"
A rousing appeal,
and the father of men and gods looked down and smiled
and took command with a flight of winging orders:
"Excellent, Hera. Now, if in the years to come
you will accord with me, my wide-eyed Queen,
throned with me in the gods' decisive sessions,
then Poseidon, bent as he is to go his own way,
must change at once and wrench his will to ours,
to yours and mine united.
So then, Hera,
if you mean what you say, down to the last word,
go back now to the deathless tribes of gods
and summon Iris to come before my presence,
summon Apollo too, lord of the famous bow.
Iris will fly to Achaea's bronze-armed troops
and direct the god who shakes the earth to stop,
to quit the war and return to his own ocean halls.
And let Apollo drive Prince Hector back to battle,
breathe power back in his lungs, make him forget
the pains that rack his heart. Let him whip the Achaeans
in headlong panic rout and roll them back once more,
tumbling back on the oar-swept ships of Peleus' son Achilles.
And he, he will launch his comrade Patroclus into action
and glorious Hector will cut him down with a spear
in front of Troy, once Patroclus has slaughtered
whole battalions of strong young fighting men
and among them all, my shining son Sarpedon.
But then—enraged for Patroclus—
brilliant Achilles will bring Prince Hector down.
And then, from that day on, I'll turn the tide of war:
back the fighting goes, no stopping it, ever, all the way
till Achaean armies seize the beetling heights of Troy
through Athena's grand design.
But till that hour
I will never cease my anger. Nor will I permit
a single immortal god to save the Argive forces,
not till Achilles' prayer has been fulfilled.
So I vowed at first. I bowed my head in assent
that day the goddess Thetis clutched my knees,
begging me to exalt Achilles scourge of cities."
And the white-armed goddess Hera obeyed at once—
clearing Ida's peaks she soared for sheer Olympus.
Quick as a thought goes flashing through a man
who's traveled the world—"Ah to be there, or there!"—
as his mind swarms with journeys, fresh desires—
so quick in her eager flight flew noble Hera now
and scaling steep Olympus went among the gods,
the immortal powers thronging Zeus's halls.
They all sprang to their feet at sight of Hera,
lifting cups to greet her, crowding round the queen.
But she passed the rest and took a cup from Themis,
flushed with beauty, who ran to meet her first
and hailed her now with winged words of welcome:
"Hera, what brings you back? You look so harried.
Oh I know it, the son of Cronus has terrified you—
your everlasting husband!"
"Please, Themis,"
the white-armed goddess Hera answered firmly,
"don't ask me to go through that ordeal again.
You know his rage yourself. So rigid, unrelenting.
But you keep on presiding over the gods, Themis,
the feasting in the halls. You'll hear it all,
and with you all the immortals—
what a chain of disasters Zeus brings to light!
Nothing to lift all spirits alike, I warn you . . .
not among men, not among gods, if one's still left
who warms to feasts, his heart at peace, these days."
With those bleak words Queen Hera took her seat.
The gods looked grim throughout the halls of Zeus:
She smiled with her lips only,
her forehead furrowed over her dark brows
as her anguish rose and she addressed them all:
"What fools we are, storming against Zeus—we're mad!
And still we engage him, trying to block his way
with a word or show of force. But there he sits,
off and away—with never a care or qualm for us—
claiming that he among the deathless gods on high
is first in strength and power, none in the world his rival.
So each of you here must take what blows he sends.
Why, Ares, I gather, has just received his share . . .
his son is dead in battle, his dearest son, Ascalaphus—
doesn't invincible Ares claim to be his father?"
Fighting words, and Ares pounded his sturdy thighs
with the flats of both hands and let loose in grief:
"Now, you gods of Olympus—who could blame me now
if I descend on Achaea's ships to avenge my son,
my butchered son? Even if fate will crush me,
striking me down with the thunderbolt of Zeus—
sprawled in the blood and dust with dead men's corpses!"
With that he called his henchmen Rout and Terror
to yoke his team as the god strapped on his shining gear.
And now some greater disaster might have come from Zeus,
some wrath, some harsher rage to break the gods on high—
if Pallas Athena, fearing the worst for all immortals,
had not leapt from her throne, bolted through the gates,
torn the helmet off his head, the shield from his back
and snatching the brazen spear from his burly grip,
propped it against a pillar
and dressed the War-god down in all his fury:
"Maniac, out of your senses! You, you're ruinedl
What are your ears for, Ares, can't you hear the truth?
Your wits are gone—where's your respect for others?
Can't you grasp what the white-armed goddess tells us?—
and she's just returned from Olympian Zeus, just now.
What's your pleasure? To fill your own cup of pain
then slink back to Olympus, whipped and fuming-forced?
You're planting the seeds of endless trouble for us all!
He will leave those men in a flash, Achaeans, Trojans,
overweening Trojans, and back great Zeus will come
to batter us on Olympus, seize one after another—
gods guilty and innocent routed all together.
So now, I tell you, drop this anger for your son.
By now some fighter better than he, a stronger hand
has gone down in his own blood, or soon will go.
It is no small labor to rescue all mankind,
every mother's son."
With that sharp warning
Athena seated headlong Ares on his throne.
But Queen Hera summoned Apollo from the halls
and Iris too, the messenger of the immortals,
and gave them both their winged marching orders:
"Zeus directs you to Ida with all good speed!
But once you arrive and meet great Zeus's glance,
do whatever the Father drives you on to do."
And with that command Queen Hera strode home
and regained her throne. But the two launched out in flight
and reaching Ida with all her springs, mother of flocks,
they found the thundering son of Cronus seated high
on Gargaron peak, crowned with a fragrant cloud.
Coming before the lord of storm and lightning
the two just stood there, waiting . . .
Nor was his heart displeased to see them both—
how fast they'd obeyed his loving wife's commands—
and first he issued Iris winging orders: "Away, Iris!
Quick as you can to the grand sea lord Poseidon.
Go, give him my message, start to finish—
and see that every word of it rings exactly so.
Command Poseidon to quit the war and slaughter now,
go back to the tribes of gods or down to his bright sea.
But if he will not obey my orders, if he spurns them,
let him beware, heart and soul—for all his power
he can never muster the will to stand my onslaught.
I claim I am far greater than he in striking force,
I am the first-born too. Yet the spirit inside him
never shrinks from claiming to be my equal, never,
though other gods will cringe from me in terror."
And Iris riding the wind obeyed his orders,
swooping down from Ida's peaks to sacred Troy.
Like the snow or freezing hail that pelts from clouds
when the North Wind born in the clear heaven blasts it on—
so in an eager rush of speed the wind-swift Iris flew
and stopped beside the famous god of earthquakes,
calling out to him, "Here is a message for you,
god of the sea-blue mane who grips the earth.
I speed this word to you from storming Zeus.
He commands you to quit the war and slaughter now,
go back to the tribes of gods or down to your bright sea!
But if you will not obey his orders, if you spurn them,
he threatens to come here in person, fight you down,
power against power. Avoid his grasp, he warns.
He claims he is far greater than you in striking force,
he is the first-born too! Yet the spirit inside you
never shrinks from claiming to be his equal, never—
though other gods will cringe from him in terror."
But the glorious god of earthquakes shook in anger:
"What outrage! Great as he is, what overweening arrogance!
So, force me, will he, to wrench my will to his?
I with the same high honors?
Three brothers we are, all sprung from Cronus,
all of us brought to birth by Rhea—Zeus and I,
Hades the third, lord of the dead beneath the earth.
The world was split three ways. Each received his realm.
When we shook the lots I drew the sea, my foaming eternal home,
and Hades drew the land of the dead engulfed in haze and night
and Zeus drew the heavens, the clouds and the high clear sky,
but the earth and Olympus heights are common to us all.
So I will never live at the beck and call of Zeus!
No, at his royal ease, and powerful as he is,
let him rest content with his third of the world.
Don't let him try to frighten me with his mighty hands—
what does he take me for, some coward out-and-out?
He'd better aim his terrible salvos at his own,
all his sons and daughters. He's their father—
they have to obey his orders. It's their fate."
Iris quick as the breezes tried to soothe him:
"Wait, god of the sea-blue mane who grips the earth—
you really want me to take that harsh, unbending answer
back to Zeus? No change of heart, not even a little?
The hearts of the great, you know, can always change . . .
you know how the Furies always stand by older brothers."
The lord of the earthquake yielded ground in answer:
"True, Iris, immortal friend, how right you are—
it's a fine thing when a messenger knows what's proper.
Ah but how it galls me, it wounds me to the quick
when the Father tries to revile me with brute abuse,
his equal in rank, our fated shares of the world the samel
Still, this time I will yield, for all my outrage . . .
but I tell you this, and there's anger in my threat:
if ever—against my will and Athena queen of armies,
Hera and Hermes, and the god of fire Hephaestus—
if Zeus ever spares the towering heights of Troy,
if he ever refuses to take her walls by force
and give the Argive troops resounding triumph,
let Zeus know this full well—
the breach between us both will never heal!"
A sharp tremor
and the massive god of earthquakes left Achaea's lines,
into the surf he dove and heroes missed him sorely.
That very instant storming Zeus dispatched Apollo:
"Go, my friend, to the side of Hector armed in bronze.
The god of the quakes who grips and pounds the earth
has just this moment plunged in his own bright sea,
diving away from all my mounting anger. Just think
what the gods would have heard if we had come to blows,
even those beneath the ground who circle Cronus.
Better for me this way, Poseidon too, to yield
before my mighty hands—outraged as he is:
not without sweat would we have called it quits.
But now take up in your hands my storm-cloud shield,
its dark tassels flying, shake it over the Argives,
stampede their heroes in panic, Archer of the Sky.
But make this glorious Hector your main concern,
rouse his breakneck courage till, racing in terror,
the Argives reach the fleet and the Hellespont in rout.
From that point on I plan my tactics, give commands
to grant the Argives breathing room in battle."
Apollo did not neglect the Father's orders.
Down from Ida's peaks he swooped like a hawk,
the killer of doves, the fastest thing on wings.
He found Prince Hector, the son of wise King Priam,
sitting up now, sprawled on the ground no longer,
just regaining his strength, just beginning
to recognize his comrades round about him . . .
His heavy sweating, his hard breathing stopped
the moment the will of storming Zeus revived him.
Apollo the Archer stood beside him, taunting,
"Hector, son of Priam, why so far from your troops?
Sitting here, half dead—some trouble's come your way?"
Hector struggled for words, his helmet flashing:
"Who are you, my lord—who of the high gods—
to probe me face-to-face?
Haven't you heard? I was killing his friends
against the ships when the lord of the war cry Ajax
struck me down with a boulder square across my chest
he took the fight right out of Me, I can tell you . . .
I thought for certain I'd go to join the dead,
descend to the House of Death this very day—
I thought I'd breathed my last."
But lord Apollo
the distant deadly Archer reassured him: "Courage!
Look what a strong support the son of Cronus
speeds from Ida to take your side and shield you—
I am Phoebus Apollo, lord of the golden sword!
I who saved you before, and along with you
your towering city too. So up now, Hector—
command your drivers here in all their hundreds
to lash their plunging teams at the hollow ships.
And I'll surge on ahead, clearing the whole way
for the teams' assault—I'll bend the Argives back!"
That breathed tremendous strength in the famous captain.
As a stallion full-fed at the manger, stalled too long,
breaking free of his tether gallops down the plain,
out for his favorite plunge in a river's cool currents,
thundering in his pride—his head flung back, his mane
streaming over his shoulders, sure and sleek in his glory,
knees racing him on to the fields and stallion-haunts he loves—
so Hector hurtled on, his legs driving, his'knees pumping,
spurring his reinsmen once he heard the god's command.
And the Argives wheeled and gave ground quickly.
Think how dogs and huntsmen off in the wilds
rush some antlered stag or skittish mountain goat
but a rocky gorge or shadowed forest gives him shelter—
they see it's not their lot to bring that quarry down,
their shouting only flushes a great bearded lion
ramping across their path, suddenly charging them,
scattering men and packs despite their lust for battle—
so up till now the Achaeans kept advancing, close formation,
stabbing away with swords and rugged two-edged spears
but once they saw tall Hector attack the ranks again
they wheeled in terror—hearts collapsed at their heels.
But Thoas son of Andraemon spurred them on,
Aetolia's best by far, skilled with the spear,
superb at cut-and-thrust
and few Achaeans could put him down in debate
when the young men vie and struggle over points.
Now forth he came with calls to back his comrades:
"Look—a genuine miracle right before my eyes!
Hector's escaped again, he's risen from the dead!
And just as each of us hoped with all his heart
he'd dropped and died at the hands of giant Ajax.
But again some god swoops down and saves this Hector—
and hasn't he wiped enough of us out already?
Now he'll make more slaughter, well I know.
He'd never be at the front, smashing our lines
unless Old Thunder, Zeus, had put him on his feet.
So come, friends, do as I say-all take my lead.
The rank and file go back, withdraw to the ships,
but we who claim to be the armies' finest champions
stand our ground-face him first, try to beat him off!
Spears at the readyl For all his fury, trust me,
he'll quake before he penetrates our front."
Sound tactics—
the captains hung on his words and all fell in line.
Squads forming around Great Ajax, King Idomeneus,
Teucer, Meriones and Meges a match for Ares
closed tight for the onset, calling all their best
to brace and face Prince Hector and Hector's Trojans.
Behind them rank and file withdrew to Achaea's ships.
But packed in a mass the Trojans came on pounding,
Hector leading the way with long, leaping strides
and heading the van in person came the god Apollo,
shoulders wrapped in cloud, gripping the storm-shield,
the tempest terror, dazzling, tassels flaring along its front—
The bronzesmith god of fire gave it to Zeus to bear
and strike fear in men and Apollo gripped it now,
locked in his two fists as he led the Trojans on.
But packed in a mass the Argives stood their ground,
deafening cries of battle breaking from both sides
as whipping arrows leapt away from bowstrings.
Showers of spears raining from daring, hardy arms
went deep into soldiers' bodies quick to fight
but showers of others, cut short
halfway before they could graze glistening skin,
stuck in the ground, still lusting to sink in flesh.
Long as Apollo held the storm-shield firm in his grasp
the weapons hurtled side-to-side and men kept falling . . .
But once he looked the fast Achaean drivers square in the eyes,
shook the shield and loosed an enormous battle cry himself,
Apollo stunned the high courage in all their chests—
they lost their grip, forgot their fighting-fury.
Routed like herds of cattle or big flocks of sheep
when two wild beasts stampede them away in terror,
suddenly pouncing down in their midst-pitch darkness,
the shepherd off and gone—so the defenseless Argives
panicked, routed. Apollo hurled fear in their hearts
and handed Hector and all his Trojans instarit glory.
There man killed man in the mad scatter of battle.
Hector finished Stichius, finished Arcesilaus off,
the one a chief of Boeotians armed in bronze,
the other, brave Menelaus' trusty comrade.
Aeneas slaughtered Medon and lasus outright,
Medon the bastard son of royal King Oileus,
Little Ajax' brother, but Medon lived in Phylace,
banished from native land—he'd killed a kinsman
dear to Oileus' wife, his stepmother Eriopis.
But lasus became a captain of Athens' troops,
Sphelus' son he was called and Bucolus' grandson.
Polydamas killed Mecisteus—
Polites cut down Echius,
first in the onset—
dashing Agenor cut down Clonius—
and Paris lanced Deiochus deep below the shoulder,
ran him through from behind as he fled the front
and the bronze spear came jutting out his chest.
While the Trojans tore the war-gear off the bodies
Argives clambered back in a tangled mass, scrambling back
through the sharp stakes and deep pit of the trench,
fleeing left and right, forced inside the rampart.
So Hector commanded his Trojans, sounding out,
"Now storm the ships! Drop those bloody spoils!
Any straggler I catch, hanging back from the fleet,
right here on the spot I'll put that man to death.
No kin, no women commit his corpse to the flames—
the dogs will tear his flesh before our walls!"
With a full-shoulder stroke he flogged his horses on,
loosing a splitting war cry down the Trojan ranks
and all cried back in answer-a savage roar rising—
driving teams and chariots close in line with his.
And Apollo far in the lead, the god's feet kicking
the banks of the deep trench down with a god's ease,
tumbled earth in the pit between, bridging it with a dike
immense and wide and long as a hurtling spear will fly
when a man makes practice casts to test his strength.
Holding formation now the Trojans rolled across it,
Apollo heading them, gripping the awesome storm-shield
and he tore that Argive rampart down with the same ease
some boy at the seashore knocks sand castles down—
he no sooner builds his playthings up, child's play,
than he wrecks them all with hands and kicking feet,
just for the sport of it. God of the wild cry, Apollo—
so you wrecked the Achaeans' work and drove the men
who had built it up with all that grief and labor
into headlong panic rout.
Achaeans stampeding back
till they reined in hard, huddling tight by the stems
and shouting out to each other, flung their arms
to all the immortals, each man crying out a prayer.
But none as rapt as Nestor, Achaea's watch and ward,
who stretched his hands to the starry skies and prayed,
"Father Zeus! If ever in Argos' golden wheatlands
one of us burned the fat thighs of sheep or bulls
and begged a safe return and you promised with a nod—
remember it now, Olympian. Save us from this ruthless day!
Don't let these Trojans mow us down in droves!"
So he pleaded
and hearing the old man's prayers, Zeus who rules the world
let loose a great crack of thunder, rending the skies.
But Trojans, thrilled at the sound of Zeus's thunder,
pitched themselves at the Argives still more fiercely,
summoning up their fiery lust for battle.
Like a giant breaker rearing up on the rangy seas,
crashing over a ship's sides, driven in by the winds
and the blast builds the comber's crushing impact—
a hoarse roar!—Trojans stormed over the rampart,
lashing their teams to fight against the ships,
hurling their two-edged spears at close range there,
Trojans from lurching cars but Achaeans from high decks,
scrambling aloft black hulls, lunged down with the long pikes—
jointed and clinched and tipped with ripping bronze—
they'd kept on board for bloody fights at sea.
Now,
as long as the armies fought to take the rampart,
far from the fast ships, Patroclus sat it out
in his friend Eurypylus' shelter . . .  460
trying to lift the soldier's heart with stories,
applying soothing drugs to his dreadful wound
as he sought to calm the black waves of pain.
But soon as he heard the Trojans storm the wall
and shouts rise from Achaeans lost in panic rout,
Patroclus gave a groan and slapping his thighs hard
with the flats of both hands, burst forth in anguish:
"I can't stay here with you any longer, Eurypylus,
much as you need me—there, a great battle breaks!
No, let an aide attend you here while I rush back
to Achilles, spur him into combat. Who knows?
With a god's help I just might rouse him now,
bring his fighting spirit round at last.
The persuasion of a comrade has its nnwerc"
With the last words his feet, sped him on.
Meanwhile the Argives blocked the Trojan assault
but they still could not repel them from the fleet,
outnumbering them as they did. Nor could the Trojans
once break through the Argives' bulking forward mass
and force their passage through to ships and shelters.
Tense as a chalk-line marks the cut of a ship timber,
drawn taut and true in a skilled shipwright's hands—
some master craftsman trained in Athena's school—
so tense the battle line was drawn, dead even . . .
Some forces at some ships, some clashing at others,
but Hector charged head-on at Ajax braced for battle
and both warriors fought it out for a single vessel,
nor could Hector burst through and ignite the hull
nor Ajax drive him back—a god drove Hector on.
And here came Caletor son of Trojan Clytius
sweeping fire against the prow but famous Ajax
stopped him short with a spear that stabbed his chest.
Down he crashed, the torch dropped from his fist,
right before Hector's eyes—he watched his cousin
sprawl in the dust before the huge black ship
and gave a stirring cry to all his units:
"Trojans! Lyciansl Dardan fighters hand-to-hand,
don't yield an inch, not in these bloody straits!
Rescue Caletor before the Argives strip his gear—
he's down, he's dead by the ships that crowd the beach!"
As he raised that cry he flung his spear at Ajax—
but the glinting metal missed and he hit Mastor's son,
Lycophron, Ajax' friend-in-arms, Cythera-bom
yet he lived with Ajax once he'd killed a man
on Cythera's holy shores. Hector killed him now
with whetted bronze, cleaving his skull above the ear
as he stood by Ajax. Down off the ship's stem he dropped,
his back slamming the ground, his limbs slack in death,
and Ajax shuddered, calling out to his brother,
"Teucer, my friend—our trusted comrade's dead,
Mastor's son who came our way from Cythera.
We lived in our halls together, prized the man
as we prize our beloved parents—Hector's killed him!
Hurry, where are your arrows fletched with death?
Where is the bow that god Apollo gave you?"
Teucer took the challenge, rushed to his side
and reflex bow in hand and quiver bristling shafts
he loosed a splattering burst against the Trojans.
He picked off Clitus, Pisenor's shining son—
the charioteer to noble Panthous' son Polydamas—
wrestling the reins, struggling to head his horses
straight for the point where most battalions panicked,
eager to please Prince Hector and all his Trojans,
Clitus raced on but his death came even faster.
No one could save him now, strain as they did—
a sudden arrow jabbed him behind the neck,
pierced him with pain and out the car he hurtled—
horses rearing in terror, empty chariot clattering off.
But their master Polydamas marked the kill at once,
ran and planted himself across the horses' path
and handed them on to Protiaon's son Astynous,
shouting strict commands—"Watch my every move!
Keep the team close by!"—then veering away himself,
back again to grapple frontline troops.
But Teucer—
quick with his next shaft the archer aimed at Hector,
at Hector's brazen crest, and would have stopped
his assault on Argive ships, hit him squarely
and torn his life out just as his courage peaked.
But he could not dodge the lightning mind of Zeus—
standing guard over Hector
Zeus tore the glory right from Teucer's grasp,
he snapped the twisted cord on his handsome bow
just as the archer drew it taut against his man
and the weighted bronze shaft skittered off to the side,
the bow dropped from his hand and Teucer shuddered,
calling out to his brother, "Oh what luck—look,
some power cuts us out of the fighting, foils our plans!
He's knocked the bow from my grip, snapped the string,
the fresh gut I tied to the weapon just at dawn
to launch the showers of arrows I'd let fly."
"Too bad, my friend," said Ajax. "Leave them there,
that bow and spill of arrows down on the ground—
a god with a grudge against us wrecks them all.
Take up a long spear, shield on your shoulder,
go for the Trojans, urge your troops to battle.
Maybe they've whipped us here but not without a fight
will they take our benched ships. Call up the joy of war!"
At that his brother dropped his bow in a shelter,
slung a shield on his shoulder, four plies thick,
over his powerful head he set a well-forged helmet,
the horsehair crest atop it tossing, bristling terror.
And taking a rugged spearshaft tipped with whetted bronze
the archer went on the run to stand by Ajax' side.
But Hector, seeing Teucer's arrows in disarray,
let fly a resounding shout to all his units:
"Trojans! Lyciansl Dardan fighters hand-to-hand!
Fight like men, my friends, call up your battle-fury—
make for the hollow ships! I see with my own eyes
how Zeus has blocked their finest archer's arrows.
Easy to see what help Zeus lends to mortals,
either to those he gives surpassing glory
or those he saps and wastes, refuses to defend,
just as he wastes the Argives' power but backs us now.
So fight by the ships, all together. And that comrade
who meets his death and destiny, speared or stabbed,
let him die! He dies fighting for fatherland—
no dishonor there!
He'll leave behind him wife and sons unscathed,
his house and estate unharmed—once these Argives
sail for home, the fatherland they love."
That was his cry
as Hector put fresh fighting spirit in each man.
But Ajax fired the troops on his side too:
"Shame, you Argives! All or nothing now—
die, or live and drive defeat from the ships!
You want this flashing Hector to take the fleet
then each man walk the waves to regain his native land?
Can't you hear him calling his armies on, full force,
this Hector, wild to gut our hulls with fire?
He's not inviting them to a dance, believe me—
he commands them into battle! No better tactics now
than to fight them hand-to-hand with all our fury.
Quick, better to live or die, once and for all,
than die by inches, slowly crushed to.death—
helpless against the hulls in the bloody press—
by far inferior men!"
And that was Ajax' cry
as the giant put fresh fighting spirit in each man.
But Hector cut down Schedius now, Perimedes' son,
a Phocian chieftain—and Ajax killed Laodamas,
captain of infantry, Antenor's splendid son—
and Polydamas killed Cyllenian Otus outright,
Meges' friend, one of the proud Epeans' leaders.
Meges saw him drop, he lunged at Polydamas, fast,
but he ducked and veered away and Meges missed him—
Apollo was not about to let him fall at the front,
not Panthous' son. But Meges did hit Croesmus,
stabbed him square in the chest with a thrusting-lance
and down he crashed—with Meges tearing the armor off his back
as the Trojan Dolops lunged at him. A crack spearman—
Laomedon's grandson, Lampus' big and brawny son,
the strongest he sired, the best trained for assault—
Dolops quickly went for Meges at close range,
he speared his bulging shield
but the solid breastplate warded off the blow
with both plates fitted tight to bind his body.
The gear his father brought from Ephyra once . . .
the Selleis banks where his host the lord Euphetes
gave him that sturdy bronze to wear in battle,
to beat off the bloody attacks of desperate men
and now it saved his son's young flesh from death.
So Meges chopped at the crown of Dolops' bronze helmet,
split its spiny ridge with a sharp cleaving spear
and sheared away its bristling horsehair crest.
Down in the dust the war-gear tumbled, all
still glistening bright in its fresh purple dye
but the man stood his ground, still rearing to fight,
his hopes still soaring for triumph. But now Menelaus,
Atrides out for blood, moved in to fight for Meges—
spear poised in his grip-in from the blind side
and struck from behind the Trojan's shoulder so hard
the spear came jutting out through his chest in all its fury
and Dolops reeled and sank, facedown on the ground.
The two men swarmed over him, ripping the armor
off his back as Hector called his kinsmen on,
all his kinsmen, but marked out Hicetaon's son
the strong Melanippus, railing first at him . . .
He used to graze his shambling herds in Percote,
long ago when the enemy's forces stood far off
but once the rolling ships of Achaea swept ashore,
home he came to Troy where he shone among the Trojans,
living close to Priam, who prized him like his sons.
But Hector rebuked him now, shouting out his name:
"Melanippus-how can we take things lying down this way?
No qualm in your heart for this? Your cousin's dead!
Can't you see how they're clawing over Dolops' armor?
Follow me now. No more standing back, no fighting
these Argives at a distance—kill them hand-to-hand.
Now-before they topple towering Ilium down,
all our people slaughtered!"
So with a shout
he surged ahead and his gallant cohort followed.
But Great Telamonian Ajax spurred his Argives on:
"Be men, my friends! Discipline fill your hearts!
Dread what comrades say of you here in bloody combat!
When men dread that, more men come through alive—
when soldiers break and run, good-bye glory,
good-bye all defenses!"
Up in arms as they were
to shield themselves, they took his word to heart,
and round the ships they raised a wall of bronze.
But against them Zeus impelled the Trojan ranks
as Menelaus lord of the war cry urged Antilochus,
"None of the younger troops, Antilochus, none
is faster of foot than you or tougher in combat—
why not leap right in and lay some Trojan out?"
Menelaus withdrew as he drove Antilochus on.
Out of the front he sprang, glaring left and right
and hurled his spear—a glinting brazen streak—
and the Trojans scattered, cringing before his shaft . . .
no wasted shot! Antilochus hit Hicetaon's son,
impetuous Melanippus sweeping into battle,
slashed him across the chest beside the nipple.
Down he crashed and the darkness swirled his eyes
with Antilochus rushing over him like some hound
pouncing down on a deer that's just been wounded—
leaping out of its lair a hunter's speared it,
a lethal hit that's loosed its springy limbs.
So staunch Antilochus leapt at you, Melanippus,
stripping away your gear, but Hector marked it now
and straight through the ruck he charged Antilochus hard.
Quick as that fighter was, he could not hold his ground,
not there—he turned tail and broke like a rogue beast
that's done some serious damage, mauled a dog to death
or a herdsman tending flocks, and takes to his heels
before the gangs of men can group and go against him.
So Antilochus turned and ran as a savage cry went up
and Hector and all his Trojans showered deadly shafts
in hot pursuit, but he wheeled and stood his ground
when he reached his thronging cohorts.
Now to the ships—
now like a pride of man-eating lions the Trojan forces
stormed the fleet, fulfilling Zeus's strict commands
as Zeus kept building their fury higher, stunned
the Argives' spirit and wrenched away their glory,
lashing Trojans on. The Father's will was set
on giving glory over to Hector son of Priam
that he might hurl his torch at the beaked ships—
the force of fire, quenchless, ravening fire, yes,
and bring to its bitter end the disastrous prayer of Thetis.
For that alone he waited, the god who rules the world,
to see with his own eyes the first Achaean ship
go up in a blaze of flames. Then, from that point on
he'd thrust the Trojans breakneck back from the fleet
and give the Argives glory. Dead set now on that,
he drove Prince Hector against the hollow hulls
though the son of Priam raged in his own right,
raged like Ares with brandished spear, or flash fire
roaring down from a ridge into thick stands of timber.
The foam flecked his mouth and his eyes shot flame,
glaring under his shaggy brows and round his head
his helmet shook and clashed, a terrific wild din—
Hector on the attack! And high in the clear sky
Zeus himself defended his champion-Hector alone
he prized and glorified among hordes of men
for Hector's life would be cut short so soon . . .
Why, even now Athena was speeding the fatal day
when he would fall to the power of great Achilles.
But now he was bent on breaking men, probing the lines
wherever he saw the largest mass and the finest gear
but he could not smash through yet for all his fury.
They closed ranks, they packed like a stone wall,
a granite cliff that towers against the churning surf,
standing up to the screaming winds, their sudden assaults
and the breaking waves they spawn that crash against its base—
so the Danaans stood the Trojan onslaught, rock-solid
and never flinched in fear. But Hector all afire,
blazing head to foot, charged at their main force,
bursting down as a wave bursts down on a veering ship,
down from under the clouds it batters, bred by gale-winds—
showers of foam overwhelmm the hull, blot it all from sight,
the hurricane's killing blast thundering into the sails
and scudding clear of death by the skin of their teeth
the sailors quake, their hearts race on with terror—
so the Achaeans' courage quaked. And Hector lunged again
like a murderous lion mad for kills, charging cattle
grazing across the flats of a broad marshy pasture,
flocks by the hundred led by an unskilled herdsman
helpless to keep the marauder off a longhorn heifer—
no fighting that bloody slaughter—all he can do
is keep pace with the lead or straggling heads,
leaving the center free for the big cat's pounce
and it eats a heifer raw as the rest stampede away.
And so the Achaeans stampeded now, unearthly terror,
all of them routed now by Father Zeus and Hector—
though Hector killed just one . . .
Periphetes, a Mycenaean, favorite son of Copreus,
Eurystheus' herald who summoned rugged Heracles
time and again to grinding labors. Copreus, yes,
that worthless father who sired a better son,
better at every skill, primed for speed and war
and his wits outstripped the best in all Mycenae,
but all of it went now to build Prince Hector's glory.
As the Argive spun in retreat his shield-rim tripped him—
down to his feet that shield he bore to keep off spears—
he stumbled over it now, pitched back, helmet clanging
harshly against his brows. as the man hit the ground,
But Hector marked him at once, rushed up to his side
and staked a spear in his chest to kill the fighter
right in the eyes of loyal comrades standing, by.
Sick for their friend but what could they do? Nothing—
just shake with dread in the face of mighty Hector.
Now the Achaeans milled among the shipways,
shielded round by the looming superstructures,
stem on stern drawn up on the first line inland.
But the Trojans stormed them there and back they fell,
they had no choice, edging away from the front ships
but once at the tents nearby they held their ground,
massing ranks, no scattering back through camp.
Their proud discipline gripped them, terror too—
they rallied each other, nonstop, war cries rising.
Noble Nestor was first, Achaea's watch and ward,
pleading, begging each man for his parents' sake,
"Be men, my friends! Discipline fill your hearts,
maintain your pride in the eyes of other men!
Remember, each of you, sons, wives, wealth, parents—
are mother and father dead or alive? No matter,
I beg you for their sakes, loved ones far away—
now stand and fight, no turning back, no panic."
With that he put new strength in each man's spirit.
Athena thrust from their eyes the blinding battle-haze,
the darkness sent by the gods, and a hard bright light
burst down in both directions, out to the ships
and down the lines where fighting drew dead even.
Now they could make out Hector lord of the war cry,
all his troops, squads in reserve and clear of battle,
forward squads that fought at the fast trim ships.
Ajax' challenge—how could it please his courage still
to hang back now where other Achaeans held the rear?
No more. Up and down the decks of the ships he went
with his great plunging strides, swinging in hand
his enormous polished pike for fights at sea,
clamped with clinchers, twenty-two forearms long.
Ajax skilled as a show-rider, a virtuoso horseman
who picks from the herd four stallions, yokes them tight
and galloping off the plain comes racing toward a large city,
over a trafficked road and the crowds gaze in wonder,
men and women watching, as sure-footed, never a slip,
the rider keeps on leaping, swinging from back to back
and the pounding team flies on. So Ajax swung now,
leaping from deck to deck on the fast trim ships,
ranging with huge strides as his voice hit the skies,
keeping up a terrific bellowing, calling Argives on
to defend the ships and shelters.
And Hector too—
how could he hold back with his massing, armored Trojans?
Now like a flashing eagle swooping down on bird-flocks,
winged thousands feeding, swarming a river's banks,
geese, cranes or swans with their long lancing necks—
so swooping Hector went headfirst at a warship,
charged its purple prow, and Zeus behind him
thrust him on with his mighty, deathless hand,
urging the soldiers on who crowded Hector's back.
And again a desperate battle broke at the ships.
You'd think they waded into the fighting, fresh troops,
unbruised, unbroken, they fought with such new fire.
And what were the fighters thinking? Only this:
the Argives certain they'd never flee the worst,
they'd perish then and there,
but the hopes soared in every Trojan's heart
to torch the ships and slaughter Argive heroes—
so ran their thoughts, closing for the kill. At last
Hector grappled a ship's stern, a beauty built for speed—
it swept the seas with Protesilaus, bore him to Troy
but never bore him back to his fatherland again.
Now churning round that ship Achaeans and Trojans
hacked each other at close range. No more war at a distance,
waiting to take the long flights of spears and arrows—
they stood there man-to-man and matched their fury,
killing each other now with hatchets, battle-axes,
big swords, two-edged spears, and many a blade,
magnificent, heavy-hilted and thonged in black
lay strewn on the ground-some dropped from hands,
some fell as the fighters' shoulder-straps were cut—
and the earth ran black with blood. And Hector held fast,
he never let go of the high stem, he hugged its horn,
arms locked in a death-grip, crying out to Trojans,
"Bring fire! Up with the war cries, all together!
Now Zeus hands us a day worth all the rest,
today we seize these ships—
they stormed ashore against the will of the gods,
they came here freighted with years of pain for us,
and all thanks to our city elders. What cowards!
Whenever I longed to fight at the ships' high stems
the old men kept me back, they held the troops in check.
Oh but if Zeus's lightning blinded us those days,
it's Zeus who drives us, hurls us on today!"
The harder he cried
the harder his forces charged against the Argives.
Not even Ajax held his post, no longer now:
forced by the shafts he backed away by inches,
certain he'd die' there-down he leapt from the decks,
down to bestride the seven-foot bridge amidships.
There he stood, tensing, braced to take them on—
his huge pike kept beating the Trojans off the hulls,
any attacker flinging tireless fire, and all the time
that terrible voice of his, bellowing out to cohorts,
"Friends! Fighting Danaans! Aides-in-arms of Ares!
Fight like men, my comrades-call up your battle-fury!
You think we have reserves in the rear to back us up?
Some stronger wall to shield our men from disaster?
No, there's no great citadel standing near with towers
where we could defend ourselves and troops could turn the tide.
No—we're here on the plain of Troy—all Troy's in arms!
Dug in, backs to the sea, land of our fathers far away!
Fight—the light of safety lies in our fighting hands,
not spines gone soft in battle!"
And with each cry
he thrust his slashing pike with a fresh new fury.
And any Trojan crashing against. the beaked ships,
torch ablaze in hand, straining to please Hector
who urged him on . . . Ajax ready and waiting there
would stab each man with his long, rugged pike—
twelve he impaled point-blank, struggling up the hulls.
So they fought to the death around that benched beaked ship
as Patroclus reached Achilles, his great commander,
and wept warm tears like a dark spring running down
some desolate rock face, its shaded currents flowing.
And the brilliant runner Achilles saw him coming,
filled with pity and spoke out winging words:
"Why in tears, Patroclus?
Like a girl, a baby running after her mother,
begging to be picked up, and she tugs her skirts,
holding her back as she tries to hurry off—all tears,
fawning up at her, till she takes her in her arms . . .
That's how you look, Patroclus, streaming live tears.
But why? Some news for the Myrmidons, news for me?
Some message from Phthia that you alone have heard?
They tell me Menoetius, Actor's son, is still alive,
and Peleus, Aeacus' son, lives on among his Myrmidons—
if both our fathers had died, we'd have some cause for grief.
Or weeping over the Argives, are you? Seeing them die
against the hollow ships, repaid for their offenses?
Out with it now! Don't harbor it deep inside you.
We must share it all."
With a wrenching. groan
you answered your friend, Patroclus O my rider:
"Achilles, son of Peleus, greatest of the Achaeans,
spare me your anger, please—
such heavy blows have overwhelmed the troops.
Our former champions, all laid up in the ships,
all are hit by arrows or run through by spears.
There's powerful Diomedes brought down by an archer,
Odysseus wounded, and Agamemnon too, the famous spearman,
and Eurypylus took an arrow-shot in the thigh . . .
Healers are working over them, using all their drugs,
trying to bind the wounds—
But you are intractable, Achilles!
Pray god such anger never seizes me, such rage you nurse.
Cursed in your own courage! What good will a man,
even one in the next generation, get from you
unless you defend the Argives from disaster?
You heart of iron! He was not your father,
the horseman Peleus—Thetis was not your mother.
Never. The salt gray sunless ocean gave you birth
and the towering blank rocks—your temper's so relentless.
But still, if down deep some prophecy makes you balk,
some doom your noble mother revealed to you from Zeus,
well and good: at least send me into battle, quickly.
Let the whole Myrmidon army follow my command—
I might bring some light of victory to our Argives!
And give me your own fine armor to buckle on my back,
so the Trojans might take me for you, Achilles, yes,
hold off from attack, and Achaea's fighting sons
get second wind, exhausted as they are . . .
Breathing room in war is all too brief.
We're fresh, unbroken. The enemy's battle-weary—
we could roll those broken Trojans back to Troy,
clear of the ships and shelters!"
So he pleaded,
lost in his own great innocence . . .
condemned to beg for his own death and brutal doom.
And moved now to his depths, the famous runner cried,
"No, no, my prince, Patroclus, what are you saying?
Prophecies? None that touch me. None I know of.
No doom my noble mother revealed to me from Zeus,
just this terrible pain that wounds me to the quick—
when one man attempts to plunder a man his equal,
to commandeer a prize, exulting so in his own power.
That's the pain that wounds me, suffering such humiliation.
That girl—the sons of Achaea picked her as my prize,
and I'd sacked a walled city, won her with my spear
but right from my grasp he tears her, mighty Agamemnon,
that son of Atreus! Treating me like some vagabond,
some outcast stripped of all my rights . . .
Enough.
Let bygones be bygones now. Done is done.
How on earth can a man rage on forever?
Still, by god, I said I would not relax my anger,
not till the cries and carnage reached my own ships.
So you, you strap my splendid armor on your back,
you lead our battle-hungry Myrmidons into action!—
if now, in fact, the black cloud of the Trojans
blasts down on the ships with full gale force,
our backs to the breaking surf but clinging still
to a cramped strip of land—the Argives, lost.
The whole city of Troy comes trampling down on us,
daring, wild—why? They cannot see the brow of my helmet
flash before their eyes—Oh they'd soon run for their lives
and choke the torrent-beds of the field with all their corpses
if only the mighty Agamemnon met me with respect:
now, as it is, they're fighting round our camp!
No spear rages now in the hand of Diomedes,
keen to save the Argives from disaster . . .
I can't even hear the battle cry of Agamemnon
break from his hated skull. But it's man-killing Hector
calling his Trojans on, his war cries crashing round me,
savage cries of his Trojans sweeping the whole plain,
victors bringing the Argive armies to their knees.
Even so, Patroclus, fight disaster off the ships,
fling yourself at the Trojans full force—
before they gut our hulls with leaping fire
and tear away the beloved day of our return.
But take this command to heart—obey it to the end.
So you can win great honor, great glory for me
in the eyes of all the Argive ranks, and they,
they'll send her back, my lithe and lovely girl,
and top it off with troves of glittering gifts.
Once you have whipped the enemy from the fleet
you must come back, Patroclus. Even if Zeus
the thundering lord of Hera lets you seize your glory,
you must not bum for war against these Trojans,
madmen lusting for battle—not without me—
you will only make my glory that much less . . .
You must not, lost in the flush and fire of triumph,
slaughtering Trojans outright, drive your troops to Troy—
what if one of the gods who never die comes down
from Olympus heights to intervene in battle?
The deadly Archer loves his Trojans dearly.
No, you must turn back—
soon as you bring the light of victory to the ships.
Let the rest of them cut themselves to pieces on the plain!
Oh would to god—Father Zeus, Athena and lord Apollo—
not one of all these Trojans could flee his death, not one,
no Argive either, but we could stride from the slaughter
so we could bring Troy's hallowed crown of towers
toppling down around us—you and I alone!
And so the comrades roused each other now.
But Ajax could hold his post on the decks no longer.
He was overwhelmed by the latest salvos, driven back
by the will of Zeus and the fearless Trojan spearmen
hurling blows nonstop—a terrific din at his temples,
his shining helmet clashing under repeated blows,
relentless blows beating his forged cheek-irons.
And the joint of his left shoulder ached with labor,
forever bracing his huge burnished shield rock-steady,
but they could not wrench it loose from round his body
for all their pelting weapons. Again and again
he fought for breath, gasping, bathed in sweat
rivering down his body, his limbs soaked and sleek . . .
where could he find some breathing room in battle?
Wherever he looked, pains heaped on pains.
Sing to me now,
you Muses, you who hold Olympus' vaulting halls,
how fire was first pitched on Achaea's ships!
Hector lunged at Ajax toe-to-toe,
hacked his ash-wood pike with a heavy sword
and striking the socket just behind the point
he slashed the head clean off, leaving the shaft,
the lopped stump dangling in Ajax' fist, useless,
bronze head bounding away, clanging along the ground.
And deep in his heart brave Ajax knew and shuddered—
here was work of the gods, thundering Zeus on high,
cutting him off from battle, dashing all his plans,
Zeus, determined to grant the Trojans triumph now.
So Ajax drew back, out of range, and then—
they flung their tireless fire at a fast trim ship.
She was up in flames at once, engulfed in quenchless fire,
in a flash the blaze went swirling round the stem
and Achilles slapped his thighs and urged Patroclus,
"To arms—Patroclus, prince and master horseman!
I can see the blaze go roaring up the ships.
They must not destroy them. No escape-route then.
Quick, strap on my gear—I'll rouse the troops."
That was all,
and Patroclus armed himself in Achilles' gleaming bronze.
First he wrapped his legs with the well-made greaves,
fastened behind the heels with silver ankle-clasps,
next he strapped the breastplate round his chest,
blazoned with stars—swift Achilles' own—
then over his shoulder Patroclus slung the sword,
the fine bronze blade with its silver-studded hilt,
and then the shield-strap and the sturdy, massive shield
and over his powerful head he set the well-forged helmet,
the horsehair crest atop it tossing, bristling terror,
and he took two rugged spears that fit his grip.
And Achilles' only weapon Patroclus did not take
was the great man's spear, weighted, heavy, tough.
No other Achaean fighter could heft that shaft,
only Achilles had the skill to wield it well:
Pelian ash it was, a gift to his father Peleus
presented by Chiron once, hewn on Pelion's crest
to be the death of heroes.
Now the war-team.
Patroclus ordered Automedon to yoke them quickly—
a man he honored next to Achilles breaker of men,
always firmest in battle, nerved to wait the call.
So at his command Automedon yoked the horses,
the rapid stallions Roan Beauty and Dapple,
the team that raced the gales, magnificent team
the storm-wind filly Lightfoot foaled for the West Wind,
grazing the lush green grass along the Ocean's tides.
And into the traces he ran the purebred Bold Dancer—
Achilles seized him once when he stormed Eetion's city,
a mortal war-horse pacing immortal horses now.
Prince Achilles, ranging his ranks of Myrmidons,
arrayed them along the shelters, all in armor.
Hungry as wolves that rend and bolt raw flesh,
hearts filled with battle-frenzy that never dies—
off on the cliffs, ripping apart some big antlered stag
they gorge on the kill till all their jaws drip red with blood,
then down in a pack they lope to a pooling, dark spring—
their their lean sharp tongues lapping the water's surface,
belching bloody meat, but the fury, never shaken,
builds inside their chests though their glutted bellies burst—
so wild the Myrmidon captains, Myrmidon field commanders
swarming round Achilles' dauntless friend-in-arms.
And there in the midst Achilles stood like the god of war,
urging his charioteers and fighters bracing shields.
There were fifty fast black ships that bore his troops
when Achilles dear to Zeus sailed east for Troy.
Fifty fighters aboard each, manning the oarlocks,
five captains he named, entrusted with command,
but he himself in his martial power ruled them all . . .
The first battalion was led by Menesthius bright in bronze,
son of Spercheus River swelled by the rains of Zeus
and bom by the lovely Polydora, Peleus' daughter,
when a girl and the god of a tireless river bedded down.
But they called him the son of Borus, Perieres' son
who showered the girl with countless bridal gifts,
his wedded bride in the sight of all the world.
The next battalion was led by fighting Eudorus,
bom out of wedlock too. Phylas' daughter,
Polymela the gorgeous dancer bore the man
when irresistible Hermes, Hermes the giant-killer
lusted for her once—she ravished the god's bright eyes,
swaying among the dancers singing goddess Artemis
with arrow of gold and cry that halloos the hunt.
And straightway up to her chamber Hermes climbed,
the Healer, in secret, lay in her arms in love
and the woman bore the god a radiant son, Eudorus—
lightning on his feet and a crack man of war.
But soon as the Lady of Labor's birthing pangs
brought him to light and he saw the blaze of day,
Actor's majestic son the powerful lord Echecles
led her home to his house with troves of bridal gifts
while old King Phylas reared the boy with kindness,
tending, embracing the young Eudorus like a son.
The third battalion was led by brave Pisander,
Maemalus' son, who outfought them all with spears,
all the Myrmidons after Achilles' friend Patroclus.
The fourth was led by the old horseman Phoenix,
Alcimedon led the fifth, Laerces' gallant son.
But soon as Achilles mustered all battalions,
positioned in battle-order led by captains,
he imposed this stem command on all his troops:
"Myrmidons! Not one of you dare forget those threats
you hurled from the fast trim ships against the Trojans
all the while I raged, and I was the one you blamed,
down to the last fighter: 'Brutal son of Peleus—
your mother nursed you on galll Merciless, iron man—
confining your own men to the ships against their will!
So home we go in those ships and cut the seas again,
since now such deadly anger strikes our captain.'
Denouncing me—
my comrades, clustered together, always grumbling.
Well, here's a tremendous work of battle, look,
blazing before your eyes
and just the sort you longed for all those days.
So each man tense with courage—fight the Trojans down!"
That was the cry that fired each soldier's heart.
Hearing the king's command the ranks pulled closer,
tight as a mason packs a good stone wall,
blocks on granite blocks for a storied house
that fights the ripping winds—crammed so close
the crested helmets, the war-shields bulging, jutting,
buckler-to-buckler, helm-to-helm, man-to-man massed tight
and the horsehair crests on glittering helmet horns brushed
as they tossed their heads, the battalions bulked so dense.
And out before them all, two men took battle-stations,
Patroclus and Automedon, seized with a single fury
to fight in the comrades' vanguard, far in front.
But Achilles strode back to his shelter now
and opened the lid of the princely inlaid sea chest
that glistening-footed Thetis stowed in his ship to carry,
filled to the brim with war-shirts, windproof cloaks
and heavy fleecy rugs. And there it rested . . .
his handsome, well-wrought cup. No other man
would drink the shining wine from its glowing depths,
nor would Achilles pour the wine to any other god,
none but Father Zeus. Lifting it from his chest
he purified it with sulphur crystals first
then rinsed it out with water running clear,
washed his hands and filled it with bright wine.
And then, taking a stand before his lodge, he prayed,
pouring the wine to earthand scanning the high skies
and the god who loves the lightning never missed a word:
"King Zeus—Pelasgian Zeus, lord of Dodona's holy shrine
dwelling far away, brooding over Dodona's bitter winters!
Your prophets dwelling round you, Zeus, the Selli
sleeping along the ground with unwashed feet . . .
If you honored me last time and heard my prayer
and rained destruction down on all Achaea's ranks,
now, once more, I beg you, bring my prayer to pass!
I myself hold out on shore with the beached ships here
but I send my comrade forth to war with troops of Myrmidons—
Launch glory along with him, high lord of thunder, Zeus!
Fill his heart with courage—so even Hector learns
if Patroclus has the skill to fight his wars alone,
my friend-in-arms, or his hands can rage unvanquished
only when I go wading in and face the grind of battle.
But once he repels the roaring onslaught from the ships
let him come back to me and our fast fleet—unharmed—
with all my armor round him, all our comrades
fighting around my friend!"
so Achilles prayed
and Zeus in all his wisdom heard those prayers.
One prayer the Father granted, the other he denied:
Patroclus would drive the onslaught off the ships—
that much Zeus granted, true,
but denied him safe and sound return from battle.
Once Achilles had poured the wine and prayed to Zeus
he returned to his shelter, stowed the cup in the chest
then took his stand outside, his spirit yearning still
to watch Achaeans and Trojans struggle to the death.
Myrmidons,
battalions ranged in armor with greathearted Patroclus, moving out now, the fury bursting inside them,
suddenly charged the Trojans—
They swarmed forth like wasps from a roadside nest
when boys have made it their sport to set them seething,
day after day tormenting them round their roadside hive—
idiot boys! they make a menace for every man in sight.
Any innocent traveler passing them on that road
can stir them accidentally—up in arms in a flash,
all in a swarm come pouring, each one raging down
to fight for home and children—
Such frenzy seized their hearts,
Myrmidons pouring out of the ships, ceaseless shouts rising
and over them all Patroclus' war cries rousing comrades:
"Myrmidons1 Brothers-in-arms of Peleus' son Achilles!
Fight like men, my friends, call up your battle-fury!
Now we must win high honor for Peleus' royal son,
far the greatest fighter among the Argive fleet,
and we who fight beside him the bravest troops—
so even mighty Atrides can see how mad he was
to disgrace Achilles, the best of the Achaeans!"
He closed with a shout and fired each fighter's heart
and down in a mass they launched against the Trojans,
ships around them echoing back their shattering cries.
The Trojans, soon as they saw Menoetius' gallant son,
himself and his loyal driver flare in brazen gear—
all their courage quaked, their columns buckled,
thinking swift Achilles had tossed to the winds
his hard rage that held him back by the ships
and chosen friendship toward the Argives now.
Each Trojan soldier glancing left and right—
how could he run from sudden, plunging death?
Patroclus was first to hurl his glittering spear,
right at the center mass—the fighters milling
round the stern of Protesilius' blazing ship—
and hit Pyraechmes, firebrand who led the Paeonians,
the master riders from Amydon, from Axius' broad currents.
Patroclus slashed his right shoulder and down he went,
his back slamming the dust with a jolting groan
as companions panicked round him—brave Paeonians—
Patroclus whipped the terror in all their hearts
when he killed the chief who topped them all in battle.
He rode them off the ships, he quenched the leaping fire,
leaving Protesilaus' hulk half-burnt but upright still
and the Trojans scattered back with high, shrill cries.
The Argives poured against them, back by the hollow hulls,
the din of battle incessant—
an Argive breakthrough—
bright as the moment Zeus the lord of lightning moves
from a craggy mountain ridge a storm cloud massing dense
and all the lookout peaks stand out and the jutting cliffs
and the steep ravines and down from the high heavens bursts
the boundless bright air . . . So now the Argives
drove the ravening fire clear of the warships,
winning a little breathing room, not much,
no real halt to the buck-and-rush of battle.
For despite the surge of the Argives primed for war
the Trojans were still not wheeling round in headlong rout
away from the black hulls. Forced back from them, true,
they braced for battle still and made a stand.
Deadlock:
there man killed man in the pell-mell clash of battle,'
captains going at captains. Brave Patroclus first—
just as Areilycus swerved in sudden flight
he gored him in the hip with a slashing spear
and the bronze lancehead hammered through his flesh,
the shaft splintering bone as he pitched face-first,
pounding the ground—
And veteran Menelaus wounded Thoas,
raking his chest where the shield-rim left it bare,
and loosed his limbs—
And Amphiclus went for Meges
but Meges saw him coming and got in first by far,
spearing him up the thigh where it joins the body,
the spot where a man's muscle bunches thickest:
the tough sinews shredded around the weapon's point
as the dark swirled down his eyes—
Nestor's sons on attack!
Antilochus struck Atymnius hard with a whetted spear,
the bronze ripping into his flank and clean through
he crashed at his feet
But Maris charged Antilochus,
sweeping in with his lance, enraged for his brother,
planted himself before his corpse but Thrasymedes,
quick as a god, beat him to it he stabbed
before Maris stabbed-no miss! right in the shoulder,
the Argive's spearpoint cracked through the bony socket,
shearing away the tendons, wrenched the whole arm out
and down he thundered, darkness blanked his eyes.
So these two brothers, laid low by the two brothers,
dropped to the world of night: Sarpedon's stalwart cohorts,
spearmen sons of Amisodarus-he who bred the Chimaera,
the grim monster that.sent so many men to death.
There—quick Oilean Ajax rushed Cleobulus,
took him alive, stumbling blind in the rout
but took his life at once, snapped his strength
with a sword that hewed his neckbone-up to the hilt
so the whole blade ran hot with blood, and red death
came flooding down his eyes, and the strong force of fate.
And now in a breakneck charge Peneleos closed with Lycon—
they'd missed each other with spears, two wasted casts,
so now both clashed with swords. Lycon, flailing,
chopped the horn of Peneleos' horsehair-crested helmet
but round the socket the sword-blade smashed to bits—
just as Peneleos hacked his neck below the ear
and the blade sank clean through, nothing held
but a flap of skin, the head swung loose to the side
as Lycon slumped down to the ground . . . There—
at a dead run Meriones ran down Acamas, Acamas
mounting behind his team, and gouged his right shoulder—
he pitched from the car and the mist whirled down his eyes.
Idomeneus skewered Erymas straight through the mouth,
the merciless brazen spearpoint raking through,
up under the brain to split his glistening skull—
teeth shattered out, both eyes brimmed to the lids
with a gush of blood and both nostrils spurting,
mouth gaping, blowing convulsive sprays of blood
and death's dark cloud closed down around his corpse.
So in a rush each Argive captain killed his man.
As ravenous wolves come swooping down on lambs or kids
to snatch them away-from right amidst their flock—all lost
when a careless shepherd leaves them straggling down the hills
and quickly spotting a chance the wolf pack picks them off,
no heart for the fight-so the Achaeans mauled the Trojans.
Shrieking flight the one thing on the Trojans' minds,
they forgot their fighting-fury . . .
Great Ajax now—forever aiming at Hector,
trying to strike his helmet flashing bronze
but Hector was far too seasoned, combat-tested,
broad shoulders hunching under his bull's-hide shield,
his eyes peeled for a whistling shaft or thudding spear.
Hector knew full well the tide of battle had turned
but still stood firm, defending die-hard comrades.
Wild as a storm cloud moving off Olympus into heaven
out of a clear blue sky when Zeus brings cyclones on—
so wild the rout, the cries that came from the ships
as back through the trench they ran, formations wrecked.
And Hector? Hector's speeding horses swept him away,
armor and all, leaving his men to face their fate,
Trojans trapped but struggling on in the deep trench.
Hundreds of plunging war-teams dragging chariots down,
snapping the yoke-poles, ditched their masters' cars
and Patroclus charged them, heart afire for the kill,
shouting his Argives forward—"Slaughter Trojans!"
Cries of terror breaking as Trojans choked all roads,
their lines ripped to pieces, up from under the hoofs
a dust storm swirling into the clouds as rearing horses
broke into stride again and galloped back to Troy,
leaving ships and shelters in their wake. Patroclus—
wherever he saw the biggest masses-dashing before him,
there he steered, plowing ahead with savage cries
and fighters tumbled out of their chariots headfirst,
crushed under their axles, war-cars crashing over, yes,
but straight across the trench went his own careering team
at a superhuman bound. Magnificent racing stallions,
gifts of the gods to Peleus, shining immortal gifts,
straining breakneck on as Patroclus' high courage
urged him against Prince Hector, keen for the kill
but Hector's veering horses swept him clear.
And all in an onrush dark as autumn days
when the whole earth flattens black beneath a gale,
when Zeus flings down his pelting, punishing rains—
up in arms, furious, storming against those men
who brawl in the courts and render crooked judgments,
men who throw all rights to the winds with no regard
for the vengeful eyes of the gods—so all their rivers
crest into flood spate, ravines overflowing cut the hilltops
off into lonely islands, the roaring flood tide rolling down
to the storm-tom sea, headlong down from the foothills
washes away the good plowed work of men—
Rampaging so,
the gasping Trojan war-teams hurtled on.
Patroclus—
soon as the fighter cut their front battalions off
he swerved back to pin them against the warships,
never letting the Trojans stream back up to Troy
as they struggled madly on-but there mid-field
between the ships, the river and beetling wall
Patroclus kept on sweeping in, hacking them down,
making them pay the price for Argives slaughtered.
There, Pronous first to fall—a glint of the spear
and Patroclus tore his chest left bare by the shield-rim,
loosed his knees and the man went crashing down.
And next he went for Thestor the son of Enops
cowering, crouched in his fine polished chariot,
crazed with fear, and the reins flew from his grip—
Patroclus rising beside him stabbed his right jawbone,
ramming the spearhead square between his teeth so hard
he hooked him by that spearhead over the chariot-rail,
hoisted, dragged the Trojan out as an angler perched
on a jutting rock ledge drags some fish from the sea,
some noble catch, with line and glittering bronze hook.
So with the spear Patroclus gaffed him off his car,
his mouth gaping round the glittering point
and flipped him down facefirst,
dead as he fell, his life breath blown away.
And next he caught Erylaus closing, lunging in—
he flung a rock and it struck between his eyes
and the man's whole skull split in his heavy helmet,
down the Trojan slammed on the ground, head-down
and courage-shattering Death engulfed his corpse.
Then in a blur of kills, Amphoterus, Erymas, Epaltes,
Tlepolemus son of Damastor, and Echius and Pyris,
Ipheus and Euippus and Polymelus the son of Argeas—
he crowded corpse on corpse on the earth that rears us all.
But now Sarpedon, watching his comrades drop and die,
war-shirts billowing free as Patroclus killed them,
dressed his godlike Lycians down with a harsh shout:
"Lycians, where's your pride? Where are you running?
Now be fast to attack! I'll take him on myself,
see who he is who routs us, wreaking havoc against us—
cutting the legs from under squads of good brave men."
With that he leapt from his chariot fully armed
and hit the ground and Patroclus straight across,
as soon as he saw him, leapt from his car too.
As a pair of crook-clawed, hook-beaked vultures
swoop to fight, screaming above some jagged rock—
so with their battle cries they rushed each other there.
And Zeus the son of Cronus with Cronus' twisting ways,
filling with pity now to see the two great fighters,
said to Hera, his sister and his wife, "My cruel fate . . .
my Sarpedon, the mail I love- the most, my own son—
doomed to die at the hands of Menoetius' son Patroclus.
My heart is torn in two as I try to weigh all this.
Shall I pluck him up, now, while he's still alive
and set him down in the rich green land of Lycia,
far from the war at Troy and all its tears?
Or beat him down at Patroclus' hands at last?"
But Queen Hera, her eyes wide, protested strongly:
"Dread majesty, son of Cronus-what are you saying?
A man, a mere mortal, his doom sealed long ago?
You'd set him free from all the pains of death?
Do as you please, Zeus . . .
but none of the deathless gods will ever praise you.
And I tell you this—take it to heart, I urge you—
if you send Sarpedon home, living still, beware!
Then surely some other god will want to sweep
his own son clear of the heavy fighting too.
Look down. Many who battle round King Priam's
mighty walls are sons of the deathless gods—
you will inspire lethal anger in them all.
No,
dear as he is to you, and your heart grieves for him,
leave Sarpedon there to die in the brutal onslaught,
beaten down at the hands of Menoetius' son Patroclus.
But once his soul and the life force have left him,
send Death to carry him home, send soothing Sleep,
all the way till they reach the broad land of Lycia.
There his brothers and countrymen will bury the prince
with full royal rites, with mounded tomb and pillar.
These are the solemn honors owed the dead."
So she pressed
and Zeus the father of men and gods complied at once.
But he showered tears of blood that drenched the earth,
showers in praise of him, his own dear son,
the man Patroclus was just about to kill
on Troy's fertile soil, far from his fatherland.
Now as the two came closing on each other
Patroclus suddenly picked off Thrasymelus
the famous driver, the aide who flanked Sarpedon—
he speared him down the guts and loosed his limbs.
But Sarpedon hurled next with a flashing lance
and missed his man but he hit the horse Bold Dancer,
stabbing his right shoulder and down the stallion went,
screaming his life out, shrieking down in the dust
as his life breath winged away. And the paired horses
reared apart-a raspy creak of the yoke, the reins flying,
fouled as the trace horse thrashed the dust in death-throes.
But the fine spearman Automedon found a cure for that—
drawing his long sharp sword from his sturdy thigh
he leapt with a stroke to cut the trace horse free—
it worked. The team righted, pulled at the reins
and again both fighters closed with savage frenzy,
dueling now to the death.
Again Sarpedon missed—
over Patroclus' left shoulder his spearhead streaked,
it never touched his body. Patroclus hurled next,
the bronze launched from his hand-no miss, a mortal hit.
He struck him right where the midriff packs the pounding heart
and down Sarpedon fell as an oak or white poplar falls
or towering pine that shipwrights up on a mountain
hew down with whetted axes for sturdy ship timber—
so he stretched in front of his team and chariot,
sprawled and roaring, clawing the bloody dust.
As the bull a marauding lion cuts from the herd,
tawny and greathearted among the shambling cattle,
dies bellowing under the lion's killing jaws—
so now Sarpedon, captain of Lycia's shieldsmen,
died at Patroclus' hands and died raging still,
crying out his beloved comrade's name: "Glaucus—
oh dear friend, dear fighter, soldier's soldier!
Now is the time to prove yourself a spearman,
a daring man of war—now, if you are brave,
make grueling battle your one consuming passion.
First find Lycia's captains, range the ranks,
spur them to fight and shield Sarpedon's body.
Then you, Glaucus, you fight for me with bronze!
You'll hang your head in shame—every day of your life—
if the Argives strip my armor here at the anchored ships
where I have gone down fighting. Hold on, full force—
spur all our men to battle!"
Death cut him short.
The end closed in around him, swirling down his eyes,
choking off his breath. Patroclus planted a heel
against his chest, wrenched the spear from his wound
and the midriff came out with it-so he dragged out both
the man's life breath and the weapon's point together.
Close by, the Myrmidons clung to the panting stallions
straining to bolt away, free of their masters' chariot.
But grief came over Glaucus, hearing his comrade's call.
His heart was racing—what could he do to help him?
Wounded himself, he gripped his right arm hard,
aching where Teucer's arrow had hit him squarely,
assaulting the Argive wall, when Teucer saved his men.
Glaucus cried a prayer to the distant deadly Archer:
"Hear me, Lord Apollo! Wherever you are now—
in Lycia's rich green country or here in Troy,
wherever on earth, you can hear a man in pain,
you have that power, and pain comes on me now.
Look at this ugly wound—
my whole arm rings with the stabbing pangs,
the blood won't clot, my shoulder's a dead weight.
I can't take up my spear, can't hold it steady—
no wading into enemy ranks to fight it out . . .
and our bravest man is dead, Sarpedon, Zeus's son—
did Zeus stand by him? Not even his own son!
I beg you, Apollo, heal this throbbing wound,
lull the pain now, lend me power in battle—
so I can rally our Lycians, drive them into war
and fight to save my comrade's corpse myself."
So Glaucus prayed and Apollo heard his prayer.
He stopped the pains at once, stanched the dark blood
in his throbbing wound and filled his heart with courage.
And Glaucus sensed it all and the man glowed with joy
that the mighty god had heard his prayer so quickly.
First he hurried to spur his Lycian captains on,
ranging his own ranks, to fight around Sarpedon,
then he ran for the Trojan lines with long strides.
He found Polydamas, Panthous' son, and Prince Agenor
and reaching Aeneas and Hector helmed in bronze,
shoulder-to-shoulder let his challenge fly:
"Hector, you've wiped your allies from your mind!
And, all for you, Hector, far from their loved ones,
far from native land they bleed their lives away.
But you won't lift a hand to fight beside them.
There lies Sarpedon, lord of Lycia's shieldsmen,
who defended his realm with just decrees and power—
Ares has cut him down with Patroclus' brazen spear.
Quick, my, friends, stand by him! Cringe with shame
at the thought they'll strip his gear and maim his corpse—
these Myrmidons, seething for all the Argive troops we killed,
we speared to death against their fast trim ships!"
Hard grief came sweeping over the Trojans' heads—
unbearable, irrepressible. He was their city's bastion,
always, even though he came from foreign parts,
and a mass of allies marched at his command
but he excelled them all in battle, always.
So now they went at the Argives, out for blood,
and furious for Sarpedon Hector swung them round.
But the Argives surged to Patroclus' savage spirit—
he spurred the Aeantes first, both ablaze for battle:
"Ajax, Ajax! Come—now thrill to fight as before,
brave among the brave, but now be braver still!
Their captain's down, the first to storm our wall,
the great Sarpedon. If only we could seize his body,
mutilate him, shame him, tear his gear from his back
and any comrade of his who tries to shield his corpse—
bring that enemy down with ruthless bronze!"
Urging so
but his men already burned to drive the Trojans off.
And both armies now, pulling their lines tighter,
Trojans and Lycians, Myrmidons and Achaeans
closed around the corpse to lunge in battle—
terrible war cries, stark clashing of armored men.
And across the onslaught Zeus swept murderous night
to make the pitched battle over his own dear son
a brutal, blinding struggle.
Here at the first assault
the Trojans shouldered back the fiery-eyed Achaeans—
a Myrmidon had been hit, and not their least man,
dauntless Agacles' son, renowned Epigeus . . .
He ruled Budion's fortress town in the old days
but then, having killed some highborn cousin, fled
to Peleus and glistening Thetis, begged for his own life
and they sent him off with Achilles, breaker of men,
east to stallion-country to fight and die in Troy.
He had just grasped the corpse
when shining Hector smashed his head with a rock
and his whole skull split in his massive helmet—
down he slammed on Sarpedon's body, facefirst
and courage-shattering Death engulfed his corpse.
Grief for his dead companion seized Patroclus now,
he tore through frontline fighters swift as a hawk
diving to scatter crows and fear-struck starlings—
straight at the Lycians, Patroclus 0 my rider,
straight at the pressing Trojan ranks you swooped,
enraged at your comrade's death! and struck Sthenelaus,
Ithaemenes' favorite son—a big rock to the neck
snapped the tendons strung to the skull's base.
So the front gave ground and flashing Hector too,
though only as far as a long slim spear can fly
when a man tests his hurling strength in the games
or in war when enemy fighters close to crush his life—
so far the Trojans gave as the Argives drove them back.
But Glaucus was first, lord of Lycia's shieldsmen now,
the first to turn and he killed the gallant Bathycles,
Chalcon's prize son who had made his home in Hellas,
excelling the Myrmidons all in wealth and fortune.
Now, just as the man was about to catch Glaucus
Glaucus suddenly spun and struck, he stabbed his chest,
ripped him down with a crash. A heavy blow to the Argives,
one of the brave ones down. A great joy to the Trojans,
massing packs of them swarming round the corpse
but Achaean forces never slacked their drive,
their juggernaut fury bore them breakneck on.
And there—Meriones killed a Trojan captain,
Laogonus, daring son of Onetor, priest of Zeus,
Idaean Zeus, and his land revered him like a god—
Meriones gouged him under the jaw and ear, his spirit
flew from his limbs and the hateful darkness gripped him.
Just then Aeneas hurled his brazen spear at Meriones,
hoping to hit the man as he charged behind his shield.
But he eyed Aeneas straight on, he dodged the bronze,
ducking down with a quick lunge, and behind his back
the heavy spearshaft plunged and stuck in the earth,
the butt- end quivering into the air till suddenly
rugged Ares snuffed its fury out, dead still.
The weapon shaking, planted fast in the ground,
his whole arm's power poured in a wasted shot,
Aeneas flared in anger, shouting out, "Meriones—
great dancer as you are, my spear would have stopped
your dancing days for good if only I had hit you!"
The hardy spearman Meriones shot back, -Aeneas—
great man of war as you are, you'll find it hard
to quench the fire of every man who fights you.
You too are made of mortal stuff, I'd say. And I,
if I'd lanced your guts with bronze-strong as you are
and cocksure of your hands—you'd give me glory now,
you'd give your life to the famous horseman Death!"
But Patroclus nerved for battle dressed him down:
"Meriones, brave as you are, why bluster on this way?
Trust me, my friend, you'll never force the Trojans
back from this corpse with a few stinging taunts—
Earth will bury many a man before that. Come—
the proof of battle is action, proof of words, debate.
No time for speeches now, it's time to fight."
Breaking off, he led the way as Meriones followed,
staunch as a god. And loud as the roar goes up
when men cut timber deep in the mountain glades
and the pounding din of axes echoes miles away—
so the pound and thud of blows came rising up
from the broad earth, from the trampled paths of war
and the bronze shields and tough plied hides struck hard
as the swords and two-edged spearheads stabbed against them.
Not even a hawk-eyed scout could still make out Sarpedon,
the man's magnificent body covered over head to toe,
buried under a mass of weapons, blood and dust.
But they still kept swarming round and round the corpse
like flies in a sheepfold buzzing over the brimming pails
in the first spring days when the buckets flood with milk.
So veteran troops kept swarming round that corpse,
never pausing—nor did mighty Zeus for a moment
turn his shining eyes from the clash of battle.
He kept them fixed on the struggling mass forever,
the Father's spirit churning, thrashing out the ways,
the numberless ways to cause Patroclus' slaughter . . .
To kill him too in this present bloody rampage
over Sarpedon's splendid body? Hector in glory
cutting Patroclus down with hacking bronze
then tearing the handsome war-gear off his back?
Or let him take still more, piling up his kills?
As Zeus turned things over, that way seemed the best:
the valiant friend-in-arms of Peleus' son Achilles
would drive the Trojans and Hector helmed in bronze
back to Troy once more, killing them by platoons—
and Zeus began with Hector, he made the man a coward.
Hector leaping back in his chariot, swerving to fly,
shouted out fresh orders—"Retreat, Trojans, now!"
He knew that Zeus had tipped the scales against him.
A rout-not even the die-hard Lycians stood their ground,
they all scattered in panic, down to the last man
when they saw their royal king speared in the heart,
Sarpedon sprawled there in the muster of the dead,
for men by the squad had dropped across his corpse
once Zeus stretched tight the lethal line of battle.
So then the Achaeans ripped the armor off his back,
Sarpedon's gleaming bronze that Menoetius' son
the brave Patroclus flung in the arms of cohorts
poised to speed those trophies back to the beaked ships.
And storming Zeus was stirring up Apollo: "On with it now—
sweep Sarpedon clear of the weapons, Phoebus my friend,
and once you wipe the dark blood from his body,
bear him far from the fighting, off and away,
and bathe him well in a river's running tides
and anoint him with deathless oils . . .
dress his body in deathless, ambrosial robes.
Then send him on his way with the wind-swift escorts,
twin brothers Sleep and Death, who with all good speed
will set him down in the broad green land of Lycia.
There his brothers and countrymen will bury the prince
with full royal rites, with mounded tomb and pillar.
These are the solemn honors owed the dead."
So he decreed
and Phoebus did not neglect the Father's strong desires.
Down from Ida's slopes he dove to the bloody field
and lifting Prince Sarpedon clear of the weapons,
bore him far from the fighting, off and away,
and bathed him well in a river's running tides
and anointed him with deathless oils . . .
dressed his body in deathless, ambrosial robes
then sent him on his way with the wind-swift escorts,
twin brothers Sleep and Death, who with all good speed
set him down in Lycia's broad green land.
But Patroclus,
giving a cry to Automedon whipping on his team,
Patroclus went for Troy's and Lycia's lines,
blind in his fatal frenzy—luckless soldier.
If only he had obeyed Achilles' strict command
he might have escaped his doom, the stark night of death.
But the will of Zeus will always overpower the will of men,
Zeus who strikes fear in even the bravest man of war
and tears away his triumph, all in a lightning flash,
and at other times he will spur a man to battle,
just as he urged Patroclus' fury now.
Patroclus—
who was the first you slaughtered, who the last
when the great gods called you down to death?
First Adrestus, then Autonous, then Echeclus,
then Perimus, Megas' son, Epistor and Melanippus,
then in a flurry Elasus, Mulius and Pylartes—
he killed them all but the rest were bent on flight.
And then and there the Achaeans might have taken Troy,
her towering gates toppling under Patroclus' power
heading the vanguard, storming on with his spear.
But Apollo took his stand on the massive rampart,
his mind blazing with death for him but help for Troy.
Three times Patroclus charged the jut of the high wall,
three times Apollo battered the man and hurled him back,
the god's immortal hands beating down on the gleaming shield.
Then at Patroclus' fourth assault like something superhuman,
the god shrieked down his winging words of terror: "Back—
Patroclus, Prince, go back! It is not the will of fate
that the proud Trojans' citadel fall before your spear,
not even before Achilles—far greater man than you!"
And Patroclus gave ground, backing a good way off,
clear of the deadly Archer's wrath.
But now Hector,
reining his high-strung team at the Scaean Gates,
debated a moment, waiting . . .
should he drive back to the rout and soldier on?
Or call his armies now to rally within the ramparts?
As he turned things over, Apollo stood beside him,
taking the shape of that lusty rugged fighter
Asius, an uncle of stallion-breaking Hector,
a blood brother of Hecuba, son of Dymas
who lived in Phrygia near Sangarius' rapids.
Like him, Apollo the son of Zeus incited Hector:
"Hector, why stop fighting? Neglecting your duty!
If only I outfought you as you can outfight me,
I'd soon teach you to shirk your work in war—
you'd pay the price, I swear. Up with you—fast!
Lash those pounding stallions straight at Patroclus—
you might kill him still—Apollo might give you glory!"
And back Apollo strode, a god in the wars of men
while glorious Hector ordered skilled Cebriones,
"Flog the team to battle!" Apollo pressed on,
wading into the ruck, hurling Argives back in chaos
and handing glory to Hector and all the Trojan forces.
But Hector ignored the Argive masses, killing none,
he lashed his pounding stallions straight at Patroclus.
Patroclus; over against him, leapt down from his car
and hit the ground, his left hand shaking a spear
and seized with his right a jagged, glittering stone
his hand could just cover—Patroclus flung it hard,
leaning into the heave, not backing away from Hector,
no, and no wasted shot. But he hit his driver—
a bastard son of famed King Priam, Cebriones
yanking the reins back taut-right between the eyes.
The sharp stone crushed both brows, the skull caved in
and both eyes burst from their sockets, dropping down
in the dust before his feet as the reinsman vaulted,
plunging off his well-wrought car like a diver—
Cebriones' life breath left his bones behind
and you taunted his corpse, Patroclus 0 my rider:
"Look what a springy man, a nimble, flashy tumbler!
Just think what he'd do at sea where the fish swarm—
why, the man could glut a fleet, diving for oysters!
Plunging overboard, even in choppy, heaving seas,
just as he dives to ground from his war-car now.
Even these Trojans have their tumblers—what a leap!"
And he leapt himself at the fighting driver's corpse
with the rushing lunge of a lion struck in the chest
as he lays waste pens of cattle—
his own lordly courage about to be his death.
So you sprang at Cebriones, full fury, Patroclus,
as Hector sprang down from his chariot just across
and the two went tussling over the corpse as lions
up on the mountain ridges over a fresh-killed stag—
both ravenous, proud and savage—fight it out to the death.
So over the driver here and both claw-mad for battle,
Patroclus son of Menoetius, Hector ablaze for glory
strained to slash each other with ruthless bronze.
Hector seized the corpse's head, would not let go—
Patroclus clung to a foot and other fighters clashed,
Trojans, Argives, all in a grueling, maiming onset.
As the East and South Winds fight in killer-squalls
deep in a mountain valley thrashing stands of timber,
oak and ash and comel with bark stretched taut and hard
and they whip their long sharp branches against each other,
a deafening roar goes up, the splintered timber crashing—
so Achaeans and Trojans crashed,
hacking into each other, and neither side now
had a thought of flight that would have meant disaster.
Showers of whetted spears stuck fast around Cebriones,
bristling winged arrows whipped from the bowstrings,
huge rocks by the salvo battering shields on shields
as they struggled round the corpse. And there he lay
in the whirling dust, overpowered in all his power
and wiped from memory all his horseman's skills.
So till the sun bestrode the sky at high noon
the weapons hurtled side-to-side and men kept falling.
But once the sun wheeled past the hour for unyoking oxen,
then the Argives mounted a fiercer new attack,
fighting beyond their fates . . .
They dragged the hero Cebriones out from under
the pelting shafts and Trojans' piercing cries
and they tore the handsome war-gear off his back
and Patroclus charged the enemy, fired for the kill.
Three times he charged with the headlong speed of Ares,
screaming his savage cry, three times he killed nine men.
Then at the fourth assault Patroclus like something superhuman—
then, Patroclus, the end of life came blazing up before you,
yes, the lord Apollo met you there in the heart of battle,
the god, the terror! Patroclus never saw him coming,
moving across the deadly rout, shrouded in thick mist
and on he came against him and looming up behind him now—
slammed his broad shoulders and back with the god's flat hand
and his eyes spun as Apollo knocked the helmet off his head
and under his horses' hoofs it tumbled, clattering on
with its four forged horns and its hollow blank eyes
and its plumes were all smeared in the bloody dust.
Forbidden before this to defile its crest in dust,,
it guarded the head and handsome brow of a god,
a man like a god, Achilles. But now the Father
gave it over to Hector to guard his head in war
since Hector's death was closing on him quickly.
Patroclus though—the spear in his grip was shattered,
the whole of its rugged bronze-shod shadow-casting length
and his shield with straps and tassels dropped from his shoulders,
flung down on the ground-and lord Apollo the son of Zeus
wrenched his breastplate off. Disaster seized him—
his fine legs buckling—
he stood there, senseless—
And now,
right at his back, close-up, a Dardan fighter speared him
squarely between the shoulder blades with a sharp lance.
Panthous' son Euphorbus, the best of his own age
at spears and a horseman's skill and speed of foot,
and even in this, his first, attack in chariots—
just learning the arts of war—
he'd brought down twenty drivers off their cars.
He was the first to launch a spear against you,
Patroclus 0 my rider, but did not bring you down.
Yanking out his ashen shaft from your body,
back he dashed and lost himself in the crowds—
the man would not stand up to Patroclus here
in mortal combat, stripped, defenseless as he was.
Patroclus stunned by the spear and the god's crushing blow
was weaving back to his own thronging comrades,
trying to escape death . . .
Hector waiting, watching
the greathearted Patroclus trying to stagger free,
seeing him wounded there with the sharp bronze
came rushing into him right across the lines
and rammed his spearshaft home,
stabbing deep in the bowels, and the brazen point
went jutting straight out through Patroclus' back.
Down he crashed—horror gripped the Achaean armies.
As when some lion overpowers a tireless wild boar
up on a mountain summit, battling in all their fury
over a little spring of water, both beasts craving
to slake their thirst, but the lion beats him down
with sheer brute force as the boar fights for breath—
so now with a close thrust Hector the son of Priam
tore the life from the fighting son of Menoetius,
from Patroclus who had killed so many men in war,
and gloried over him, wild winging words: "Patroclus—
surely you must have thought you'd storm my city down,
you'd wrest from the wives of Troy their day of freedom,
drag them off in ships to your own dear fatherland—
you fool! Rearing in their defense my war-team,
Hector's horses were charging out to battle,
galloping, full stretch. And I with my spear,
Hector, shining among my combat-loving comrades,
I fight away from them the fatal day—but you,
the vultures will eat your body raw!
Poor, doomed . . .
not for all his power could Achilles save you now—
and how he must have filled your ears with orders
as you went marching out and the hero stayed behind:
'Now don't come back to the hollow ships, you hear?- 980
Patroclus, master horseman—
not till you've slashed the shirt around his chest
and soaked it red in the blood of man-killing Hector!'
So he must have commanded—you maniac, you obeyed."
Struggling for breath, you answered, Patroclus 0 my rider,
"Hector! Now is your time to glory to the skies . . .
now the victory is yours.
A gift of the son of Cronus, Zeus-Apollo too—
they brought me down with all their deathless ease,
they are the ones who tore the armor off my back.
Even if twenty Hectors had charged against me—
they'd all have died here, laid low by my spear.
No, deadly fate in league with Apollo killed me.
From the ranks of men, Euphorbus. You came third,
and all you could do was finish off my life . . .
One more thing-take it to heart, I urge you—
you too, you won't live long yourself, I. swear.
Already I see them looming up beside you-death
and the strong force of fate, to bring you down
at the hands of Aeacus' great royal son . . .
Achilles!"
Death cut him short. The end closed in around him.
Flying free of his limbs
his soul went winging down to the House of Death,
wailing his fate, leaving his manhood far behind,
his young and supple strength. But glorious Hector
taunted Patroclus' body, dead as he was, "Why, Patroclus—
why prophesy my doom, my sudden death? Who knows?—
Achilles the son of sleek-haired Thetis may outrace me—
struck by my spear first—and gasp away his life!"
With that he planted a heel against Patroclus' chest,
wrenched his brazen spear from the wound, kicked him over,
flat on his back, free and clear of the weapon.
At once he went for Automedon with that spear—
quick as a god, the aide of swift Achilles—
keen to cut him down but his veering horses
swept him well away-magnificent racing stallions,
gifts of the gods to Peleus, shining immortal gifts.
But Atreus' son the fighting Menelaus marked it all—
the Trojans killing Patroclus there in the brutal carnage—
and crested now in his gleaming bronze gear Atrides
plowed through the front to stand astride the body,
braced like a mother cow lowing over a calf,
her first-born, first labor-pangs she'd felt.
So the red-haired captain bestrode Patroclus now,
shielding his corpse with spear and round buckler,
burning to kill off any man who met him face-to-face.
But Euphorbus who hurled the lethal ashen spear
would not neglect his kill, Patroclus' handsome body.
Halting close beside it, he taunted fighting, Menelaus:
"Back, high and mighty Atrides, captain of armies—
back from the corpse, and leave the bloody gear!
I was the first Trojan, first of the famous allies
to spear Patroclus down in the last rough charge.
So let me seize my glory among the Trojans now—
or I'll spear you too, I'll rip your own sweet life away!"
But the red-haired captain flared back in anger:
"Father Zeus—listen to this indecent, reckless bluster!
Not even the leopard's fury makes the beast so proud,
not even the lion's, not the murderous wild boar's,
the greatest pride of all, bursting the boar's chest
they're nothing next to the pride of Panthous' sons
with their strong ashen spears. But no, no joy
did even powerful Hyperenor, breaker of horses,
get from his young strength when he scorned me,
stood up to me, reviling me as the weakest fighter
in all Achaea's armies. Home he went, I'd say,
but not on his own two feet, and brought no cheer
to his loyal, loving wife and devoted parents.
And you, I'll break your courage for you too
if you try to take me on.
Go back to your own rank and file, I tell you!
Don't stand up against me—or you will meet your death.
Even a fool learns something once it hits him."
So he warned
but failed to shake Euphorbus who shot right back,
"Now, high and mighty Atrides, now by heaven
you pay in blood for the brother you laid low!
You glory over it too—making his wife a widow
lost in the depths of their new bridal chamber,
bringing his parents cursed tears and grief.
But I could stop that wretched couple's pain
if only I brought your head and bloody armor home
and laid them in Panthous' arms, in lovely Phrontis' arms!
We're wasting time. Our fight's unfought, untested—
we'll see who stands his ground, who cuts and runs."
And he stabbed Menelaus' round shield, full center,
not battering through—the brazen point bent back
in the tough armor.
But his turn next, Menelaus
rose with a bronze lance and a prayer to Father Zeus
and lunging out at Euphorbus just dropping back,
pierced the pit of his throat-leaning into it hard,
his whole arm's weight in the stroke to drive it home
and the point went slicing through the tender neck.
He fell with a crash, armor ringing against his ribs,
his locks like the Graces' locks splashed with blood,
still braided tight with gold and silver clips,
pinched in like a wasp's waist. There he lay
like an olive slip a farmer rears to strength
on a lonely hilltop, drenching it down with water,
a fine young stripling tree, and the winds stir it softly,
rustling from every side, and it bursts with silver shoots-—
then suddenly out of nowhere a wind in gale force comes storming,
rips it out of its trench, stretches it out on the earth—
so Panthous' stripling son lay sprawled in death,
Euphorbus who hurled the strong ashen spear . . .
Menelaus cut him down, was stripping off his armor—
Menelaus fierce as a mountain lion sure of his power,
seizing the choicest head from a good grazing herd.
First he cracks its neck, clamped in his huge jaws,
mauling the kill then down in gulps he bolts it,
blood and guts, and around him dogs and shepherds
raise a fierce din but they keep their distance,
lacking nerve to go in and take the lion on—
the fear that grips their spirit makes them blanch.
So now not a single Trojan fighter had the spine
to go and face Atrides tensing in all his strength.
Then and there Menelaus might have stripped Euphorbus
and swept the Trojan's glittering armor off with ease
if Apollo had not grudged him all that glory,
rousing Hector against him, swift as Ares.
Taking a man's shape, the Cicones' captain Mentes,
Apollo spurred him on with winged orders: "Hector—
you're chasing the wild wind, fiery Achilles' team!
They're hard for mortal men to curb and drive,
for all but Achilles-his mother is immortal.
But all the while Menelaus, Atreus' fighting son
bestrides Patroclus—he's killed the Trojans' best,
Panthous' son Euphorbus, stopped his fury cold."
And back Apollo strode, a god in the wars of men.
But grief bore down on Hector, packing his dark heart
as he scanned the battle lines and saw the worst at once:
the two men there, one stripping the gleaming armor,
the other sprawled on the ground,
blood still spurting warm from his slashed throat.
Down the front he charged, crested in flashing bronze,
Hector loosing a savage cry and flaring on like fire,
like the god of fire, the blaze that never dies.
And the cry pierced Menelaus, deeply tom now
as he probed his own great heart: "What can I do?
If I leave this splendid gear and desert Patroclus—
who fell here fighting, all to redeem my honor—
won't any comrade curse me, seeing me break away?
But if I should take on Hector and Hector's Trojans
alone, in single combat-trying to save my pride—
won't they encircle me, one against so many?
This flashing Hector has all Troy at his back!
But why debate, my friend, why thrash things out?
When you fight a man against the will of the gods,
a man they have sworn to honor-then look out,
a heavy wave of ruin's about to overwhelm you.
Surely no Achaean will curse me, seeing me now,
giving ground to Hector . . .
since fighting Hector's flanked by god almighty.
Ah if only I knew where Ajax could be found,
that man with his ringing war cry—we two together
would go back to the melee calling up our fury,
even fight in the teeth of every god on high
and haul the body back to Achilles-somehow.
Things are bad, but that would be the best."
Working it out, his heart racing as on they came,
waves of Trojan soldiers and Hector led them in.
And Atrides gave ground, he left the corpse
but kept on turning round to face an attack—
like a great bearded lion the dogs and field hands
drive back from the folds with spears and sharp cries
and the brave, battling heart in his chest freezes tight
and the big cat, all reluctance, pulls back from the sheds.
So the red-haired captain backed away from Patroclus' corpse
but wheeled at bay when he reached his waiting allies,
glancing round and round for Ajax' massive hulk.
All at once on the left flank he marked him,
spurring companions, urging them to fight,
for Phoebus had filled each man with quaking fear.
Atrides went on the run and reached him, shouting, "Ajax!
Hurry, my friend, this way-fight for dead Patroclus!
At least we could bring his body back to Achilles,
stripped as Patroclus is-but not Achilles' armor:
Hector with that flashing helmet has seized it all."
So he roused the fury in battling Ajax' heart
and down the front he stalked with the red-haired king.
Hector, tearing the famous armor off Patroclus,
tugged hard at the corpse,
mad to hack the head from the neck with bronze
and drag the trunk away to glut the dogs of Troy.
But in charged Ajax, shield like a tower before him
and Hector, falling back on a crowd of comrades,
leapt to his chariot, flinging the burnished gear
to his waiting troops to haul away to Troy—
trophies to be his own enormous glory. But Ajax,
shielding Patroclus round with his broad buckler,
stood fast now like a lion cornered round his young
when hunters cross him, leading his cubs through woods—
he ramps in all the pride of his power, bristling strength,
the heavy folds of his forehead frowning down his eyes.
So Ajax stood his ground over brave Patroclus now—
the fighting Atrides right beside him, standing fast,
his grief mounting, every waiting moment.
But Glaucus,
Hippolochus' son and lord of Lycia's forces now,
scowled at Hector, lashing out at him: "Hector—
our prince of beauty, in battle all a sham!
That empty glory of yours a runner's glory,
a scurrying girl's at that.
Now you'd better plan how to save your city,
you alone and your native troopers born in Troy.
Now not a single Lycian goes to fight the Argives,
not to save your Troy. What lasting thanks for us,
for warring with your enemies, on and on, no end?
What hope has the common soldier in your ranks
to be saved by you, Hector, you heart of iron?—
if you could quit Sarpedon, your guest and friend-in-arms
abandoned there as carrion fit for the Argive maws.
Think what a staunch support Sarpedon was to you
and to all Troy while the man was still alive!
Now you lack the daring to save him from the dogs.
So now, if any Lycian troops will obey my orders,
home we go—and headlong death can come and topple Troy.
If the Trojans had that courage, unswerving courage
that fires men who fight for their own country,
beating their enemies down in war and struggle,
then we could drag Patroclus back to Troy at once.
If we could haul him from battle, dead as he is,
and lodge him behind King Priam's looming walls,
our enemies would release Sarpedon's gear at once
and then, then we could bring his body back to Troy.
For the man we cut down here was the loyal friend
of Prince Achilles—far the greatest among the Argive ships
and at his command go rugged fighters hand-to-hand.
But you-with enemy war cries ringing in your ears—
you lacked the nerve to go up against Great Ajax,
that fierce heart, to look him straight in the eye
and fight the man head-on—he's a better man than you!"
With a dark glance from under his flashing helmet
Hector lashed back, "Glaucus, such brazen insolence
from a decent man like you, but why? Ah too bad,
and I always thought you excelled the rest in sense,
all who hale from Lycia's fertile soil. But now—
you fill me with contempt—what are you saying?
You tell me that I can't stand up to monstrous Ajax?
I tell you I never cringe at war and thundering horses!
But the will of Zeus will always overpower the will of men,
Zeus who strikes fear in even the bravest man of war
and tears away his triumph, all in a lightning flash,
and at other times he will spur a man to battle.
Come on, my friend, stand by me, watch me work!
See if I prove a coward dawn to dusk-your claim—
or I stop some Argive, blazing in all his power,
from fighting on to shield Patroclus' corpse!"
With that he loosed a shrill cry to his Trojans,
"Trojans! Lycians! Dardan fighters hand-to-hand—
now be men, my friends, call up your battle-fury!
I'll strap on the brave Achilles' armor, burnished armor
I stripped from strong Patroclus when I killed him!"
So he cried and his own bronze helmet flashed
as Hector veered away from the heavy fighting,
running after his men and caught them quickly.
They'd not gone far and he ran with eager strides
as they bore Achilles' famous arms toward Troy.
Standing far from the war and all its heartbreak
Hector exchanged his armor, handing his own gear
to his battle-hungry troops to return to holy Troy,
and donned the deathless arms of Peleus' son Achilles,
arms the gods of the sky once gave his loving father—
and Peleus passed them on to his son when he grew old
but the son would not grow old in his father's armor.
Now,
when Zeus who arrays the clouds saw Hector from afar,
strapping on the gear of Peleus' godlike son,
he shook his head and addressed his own deep heart:
"Poor soldier. Never a thought of death weighs down
your spirit now, yet death is right beside you . . .
You don the deathless arms of a great fighter—
and all other fighters tremble before him, true,
but you, you killed his comrade, gentle, strong,
and against all rights you ripped the immortal armor
off his head and shoulders. So great power for the moment
I will grant you to compensate for all that is to come:
never again will you return from battle, Hector,
nor will Andromache take that famous armor,
Achilles' deathless armor, from your hands."
So he decreed
and the son of Cronus bowed his craggy dark brows.
Zeus fitted the armor tightly on Hector's body
and Ares surged in his heart with awesome force,
filling his limbs with power and fighting strength.
And on he strode amidst his illustrious Trojan allies—
calling out with wild cries, now flashing before them all
in the gleaming battle-gear of greathearted Achilles.
He ranged their ranks, inspiriting every captain,
commanding Mesthles, Glaucus, Medon, Thersilochus,
Asteropaeus, Disenor, Hippothous, Phorcys, Chromius,
Ennomus too, who could read the flight of birds.
Hector drove them on with winging orders: "Hear me—
numberless tribes of allies living round our borders—
I neither sought nor needed enormous hordes of men
that day I called you here, each from your own city.
What I needed was men to shield our helpless children,
fighting men to defend our Trojan women-all-out—
against these savage Argives. That goal in mind,
I bleed my own people for gifts and food
so I can build your courage, each and every man.
So now, each of you, turn straight for the enemy,
live or die-that is the lovely give-and-take of war.
That man who drags Patroclus back to Trojan charioteers,
dead as Patroclus is, and makes Great Ajax yield—
to him I will give one half the bloody spoils,
keep half for myself—his glory will equal mine!"
Strong vow—
and they bore straight down on the Argives full force,
shaking their spears, their hearts fired with hopes
of dragging Patroclus' body out from under Ajax—
fools! Over the corpse he'd cut down crowds of men,
though now, at this point, Ajax warned Menelaus,
lord of the battle cry, "Old friend, my Prince,
I lose hope that we alone, on our own power,
can make it back from the fighting.
I not only fear for our comrade's body—
Patroclus will glut the dogs and birds of Troy
and all too soon—but I fear for my own head,
for my own life. And yours too, Menelaus—
look at this cloud of war that blots out all the field,
this Hector, this headlong death that stares us in the face!
Quick, call to the chiefs—if one can hear you now."
At that the prince of the battle cry complied
with a high piercing shout that reached all troops:
"Friends-lords of the Argives, 0 my captains!
All who join the Atridae, Agamemnon and Menelaus,
who drink wine at the king's expense and hold command
of your own troops, your rank and fame from Zeus!
Impossible now to pick you out, my captains,
man by man—the battle blazes up so wildly.
Forward, each on his own! You'll die of shame
if the dogs of Ilium make Patroclus ripping sport."
And the quick Oilean Ajax heard him clearly,
first on the run along the fighting front to meet him—
Idomeneus after him and Idomeneus' good aide,
Meriones, a match for the butcher god of war.
For the rest who followed, waking Achaea's war-lust,
what man has spirit strong enough to sing their names?
Down in a mass the Trojans pounded—Hector led them in,
charging in as a heavy surf roars in aeainst the rio
at a river's mouth, swelled with rains from Zeus,
and on either side the jutting headlands bellow back
at the booming sea with matching thunder—in they came,
the Trojans roaring in. But the Argives faced them,
standing fast in a ring around Patroclus, one fury
seizing their hearts, packing a wall of bronze shields
and round about their glittering crested helmets now
the son of Cronus spread a dense, deepening mist.
He had never hated Menoetius' son in the past,
while he was alive and still Achilles' aide,
and now the Father loathed to see him prey
to Troy's marauders, the ravening dogs of Troy—
so he drove his comrades on to shield his corpse.
At first the Trojans could ram the Argives back
and they abandoned the corpse, their fiery-eyed battalions
fled away in panic. But still the breakneck Trojans,
up in arms as they were,
killed off none of the Argives with their spears—
instead they began to drag away Patroclus' corpse.
But not for long would his comrades give him up:
in a swift maneuver Ajax wheeled them round,
Ajax, greatest in build, greatest in works of war
of all the Argives after Peleus' matchless son.
Right through the front he plowed like a wild boar
ramping in power up on the high mountain ridges,
scattering dogs and reckless hunters at one charge
when he wheels at bay and drives them down the glades.
So now the son of noble Telamon, dauntless Ajax
scattered the massing Trojan packs at a charge,
all who bestrode Patroclus now, high with hopes
of dragging him back to Troy to win the glory—
Trying hardest,
Hippothous out for fame . . . Pelasgian Lethus' son,
lashing a shield-strap round the ankle tendons,
was hauling Patroclus footfirst through the melee,
hoping to please Prince Hector and all the Trojans,
Hippothous rushing on but death came just as fast.
No Trojans could save him now, strain as they might
Ajax son of Telamon charging quickly into the carnage
speared him at close range through the bronze-cheeked helmet,
the horsehair crest cracked wide open around the point,
smashed by the massive spear and hand that drove it.
His brains burst from the wound in sprays of blood,
soaking the weapon's socket—
his strength dissolved on the spot, his grip loosed
and he dropped the foot of brave Patroclus' corpse.
There on the ground it lay-he rushed to join it,
pitching over the dead man's body face-to-face,
a world away from Larissa's dark rich soil . . .
Never would he repay his loving parents now
for the gift of rearing—his life cut short so soon,
brought down by the spear of lionhearted Ajax. .
Hector hurled at him—a sudden glint of the spear—
but Ajax saw it coming and dodged the bronze shaft,
just by a hair, and the weapon caught Schedius,
gallant Iphitus' son and Phocia's finest man,
who made his home in the famous town of Panopeus,
ruling tribes of men. Hector speared him now—
the point split the collarbone, slashing through
and out by the shoulder's base, sticking out the back.
He fell with a crash, his armor clanging round him.
Ajax next—
with a lunge he stabbed Phorcys, Phaenops' warrior son
bestriding Hippothous' corpse—he ripped his belly,
smashing the corslet just where the plates join
and the bronze spearhead spilled his entrails out
and down went Phorcys, grasping, clawing the dust.
The Trojan front gave ground, glorious Hector too
and the Argives yelled wildly, dragging the bodies,
hauling Hippothous' corpse along with Phorcys' now
and tearing the bloody armor off their backs.
Then, once more,
Trojan troops would have clambered back inside 'their walls,
whipped weak with fear by the Argives primed for battle
and they, they would have seized enormous glory—
yes, defying even the great decree of Zeus—
by dint of their own power and striking force.
But god Apollo himself spurred on Aeneas,
taking the build of Periphas, Summoner's son
who had grown old as, herald to Aeneas' father
the aged king—a loving, loyal herald too . . . .
Like him to the life, Apollo provoked Aeneas:
"Aeneas—how could you and your men save Troy
with the gods against you? As I've seen other men
who trust to their own power and striking force,
their own valor, their own troop-strength—
even badly outmanned—defend their country well.
But Zeus is with us here! Decreeing triumph for us,
not for the Argives now. But you, you're all frightened
out of your minds—you cannot fight."
The deadly Archer—
Aeneas knew him at once, looking straight in his eyes
and the fighter loosed a rousing shout at Hector:
"Hector—all you captains of Trojans, Trojan allies—
shame, what shame! Clambering back into Troy now,
whipped weak with fear by the Argive forces? Look—
one of the gods comes up beside me, tells me Zeus
the supreme commander still impels us all in battle.
So go for the Argives—head-on! Don't let them bear
Patroclus' body back to their ships without a fight!"
And springing out of the lines Aeneas took his stand
as the rest swung round and braced to meet the Argives.
There—Aeneas lunged and speared Leocritus through,
a son of Arisbas, Lycomedes' die-hard friend.
And veteran Lycomedes pitied him as he dropped,
sweeping beside him, rearing—a flash of his lance
and he hit a captain, Hippasus' son Apisaon,
slitting open his liver, up under the midriff . . .
His knees went limp, a man who'd marched from Paeonia,
good fertile soil where he excelled all fighters,
all but Asteropaeus—
Down to the ground he went
but battling Asteropaeus pitied his comrade's pain
and charged the Argives hard, mad to fight it out—
no use, too late. They'd packed behind their shields,
ringing Patroclus round on all sides, spears jutting
as Ajax ranged them all and shouted out commands:
"No one back away from the body! No heroes either,
bolting out of the Argive pack for single combat!
Cluster round Patroclus, shoulder-to-shoulder,
fight them at close range!" At the giant's command
the earth ran red with blood, slithering dark now
and the soldiers' corpses tumbling thick-and-fast,
Trojans and breakneck allies-piled alongside Argives—
how could the Argives fight without some bloody losses?
But far fewer of them went down, remembering always
to fight in tight formation,
friend defending friend from headlong slaughter.
So on they fought like a swirl of living fire—
you could not say if the sun and moon still stood secure,
so dense the battle-haze that engulfed the brave
who stood their ground around Patroclus' body.
But the other Trojans and Argive men-at-arms
fought on at their ease beneath a clear blue sky—
sharp brilliance of sunlight glittering round them,
not a cloud in sight to shadow the earth and mountains.
Men who fought at a distance worked with frequent breaks,
dodging painful arrows that showered side-to-side.
But men who held the center suffered agonies,
thanks to the haze and carnage—
ruthless bronze hacking their lines to pieces,
there where the bravest fought. Yet two men there,
famous fighters, Antilochus flanking Thrasymedes
still had not caught word of Patroclus' death:
they thought the gallant soldier still alive,
fighting Trojans up on the clashing front lines.
But the two men kept their lookout, always alert
to their comrades' deaths or signs of instant flight
as the two fought out on the flank—just as Nestor ordered,
sending both sons forth from the black ships to battle.
So all day long for the men of war the fighting raged,
grim and grueling, relentless, drenching labor, nonstop,
and the knees, shins and feet that upheld each fighter,
their hands, their eyes, ran with the sweat of struggle
over the great runner Achilles' steadfast aide-in-arms—
an enormous tug-of-war. As when some master tanner
gives his crews the hide of a huge bull for stretching,
the beast's skin soaked in grease and the men grab hold,
bracing round in a broad circle, tugging, stretching hard
till the skin's oils go dripping out as the grease sinks in,
so many workers stretch the whole hide tough and taut—
so back and forth in a cramped space they tugged,
both sides dragging the corpse and hopes rising,
Trojans hoping to drag Patroclus back to Troy,
Achaeans to drag him back to the hollow ships
and round him always the brutal struggle raging.
Not even Ares, lasher of armies, not even Athena
watching the battle here could scorn its fury,
not even in their most savage lust for combat, no—
so tense the work of war for the men and chariot-teams
that Zeus stretched taut across Patroclus this one day . . .
But great Achilles knew nothing yet of Patroclus' death.
They were fighting far afield of the deep-sea ships,
beneath the Trojan wall, so Achilles never feared
his friend was dead—he must be still alive,
pressing on to the very gates, but he'd come back.
Achilles never dreamed Patroclus would storm all Troy
without him, not even with him. No, time and again
his mother Thetis told him this was not to be,
she told him alone, in secret . . .
always bringing word of mighty Zeus's plans,
but not this time. One thing she never told him—
his own mother—what a terrible thing had taken place:
his dearest friend-in-arms on earth lay dead.
Over his corpse
no letup, the fighters kept on thrusting whetted spears,
locked in endless struggle, cutting each other down.
And an Argive armed in bronze would call out, "Friends!
Our glory's gone if we fall back now on the ships—
let the black earth gape and take us all at once,
here and now! Better for us that way, by far,
if we yield his corpse to the stallion-breaking Trojans,
all to drag him back to Troy and win the glory."
And a hardy Trojan would call on his side, "Friends!
What if it's fated for us to die beside this body—
all dead in a mass? Let no man quit the battle!"
So they would say, fuelingg comrades' courage.
And so they fought and the iron din went rising up
to the bronze sky through the barren breathless air.
But standing clear of the fray Achilles' horses wept
from the time they first had sensed their driver's death,
brought down in the dust by man-killing Hector.
Diores' rugged son Automedon did his best,
lashed them over and over with stinging whip—
coaxing them gently now, now shouting oath on oath.
But both balked at returning now to the ships
moored at the Hellespont's far-reaching shore
or galloping back to fight beside the Argives.
Staunch as a pillar planted tall above a barrow,
standing sentry over some lord or lady's grave-site,
so they stood, holding the blazoned chariot stock-still,
their heads trailing along the ground, warm tears flowing
down from their eyes to wet the earth . . . the horses mourned,
longing now for their driver, their luxurious manes soiled,
streaming down from the yoke-pads, down along the yoke.
And Zeus pitied them, watching their tears flow.
He shook his head and addressed his own deep heart:
"Poor creatures, why did we give you to King Peleus,
a mortal doomed to death . . .
you immortal beasts who never age or die?
So you could suffer the pains of wretched men?
There is nothing alive more agonized than man
of all that breathe and crawl across the earth.
But Hector, at least, will never ride behind you,
you and your blazoned chariot. I will never permit it.
What more does he want? The arms are enough for him—
Priam's son with his empty, futile boasting.
But I will fill your legs and hearts with strength
so you can save Automedon, bear him from the fighting
back to the fleet. For still I will give the Trojans glory—
killing all the way to the benched ships till the sun sinks
and the blessed darkness sweeps across the earth."
And with that he breathed fresh fire in the team.
They shook the dust from their manes and galloped off,
speeding the fast chariot just where the armies clashed.
Automedon fought as he rode, though grieving for his friend,
swooping in with the team like a vulture after geese.
Now he'd veer from the Trojan melee in a flash
then dart back in a charge, pursuing mobs of men
but he could not kill the ones he rushed in force—
no way for him now, alone in the hurtling car,
to lunge with a spear and still control those racers.
But at last a cohort marked the driver's straits,
Alcimedon the son of Laerces, Haemon's grandson
coming behind the chariot, shouted out, 'Automedon)
What god has put such a tactic in your head?
It's good-for-nothing—he's torn your wits away.
Taking the Trojans on alone, on the front lines
but your comrade's dead, look, and Hector himself,
strapped in Achilles' armor, swaggers on in glory!"
Diores' son Automedon shouted back, "Alcimedon!
What other Achaean driver could match your skill
at curbing this deathless team or spurring on their fury?
Only Patroclus, skilled as the gods themselves
while the man was still alive—
now death and fate have got him in their grip.
On with it! Take up the whip and shining reins,
I'll dismount the car and fight on foot."
Alcimedon sprang aboard the hurtling chariot,
quickly grasping the whip and reins in both fists
as Automedon leapt to ground. But Hector saw them
and called at once to Aeneas posted close beside him,
"Aeneas, counselor of the Trojans armed in bronze,
I can see the great runner Achilles' team—look there—
heading into the fight but reined by feeble drivers.
So my hopes ride high that we can seize them now
if you have the heart to join me.
Charge! Those two will flinch, they'd never dare
stand up to us man-to-man in all-out battle!"
And Anchises' gallant son did not resist.
They went straight on, shoulders shielded in oxhide
tanned and tough and hammered thick with bronze.
And a brace of fighters, Chromius, strong Aretus
flanked their attack and the Trojans had high hopes
of killing the men and driving off the massive stallions.
Reckless fools! They'd never disengage from Automedon,
not without some bloodshed. No, with a prayer to Zeus
some new fighting power had filled his dark heart
and he quickly called his trusted friend Alcimedon:
"Alcimedon, keep those horses close beside me,
breathing down my neck. Nothing can hold him back,
this Hector in all his fury—nothing, I tell you—
not till he leaps behind Achilles' long-maned team
and kills us both and routs our forward line—
or he goes down himself in the first assault."
And he called the two Aeantes and Menelaus:
"Ajax, Ajax—lords of the Argives—Menelaus!
Leave Patroclus now to the best men you can find,
they'll straddle the corpse and fight off Trojan packs—
you fight the fatal day from us, we're still alive.
Here they come, full tilt, Aeneas and Hector,
Troy's best men, bearing down on us here—
this point of tears and attack!
But all lies in the lap of the great gods.
I'll fling a spear myself and leave the rest to Zeus."
He aimed and hurled and his spear's long shadow flew
and hit Aretus square in the balanced round shield—
no blocking the shaft, the bronze rammed through,
piercing his belt and gouging down his belly.
As a burly farmhand wielding a whetted ax,
chopping a field-ranging bull behind the horns,
hacks through its whole hump and the beast heaves up
then topples forward—so Aretus reared, heaving up
then toppled down on his back. The slashing spear
shuddered tense in his guts and the man was gone.
A flash of a lance—Hector hurled at Automedon
who kept his eyes right on him, dodged the bronze,
ducking down with a quick lunge, and behind his back
the heavy spearshaft plunged and stuck in the earth,
the butt end quivering into the air till suddenly
rugged Ares snuffed its fury out, dead still . . .
Now they would have attacked with swords, close-up,
incensed, but the two Aeantes drove a wedge between them,
plowing through the press at their comrade's call.
Cowering backward fast the Trojans gave ground,
Hector, Aeneas and Chromius, noble prince,
deserted Aretus there, his life tom out,
sprawled on the spot. Automedon rushed in,
wild as the god of war to strip the armor off,
shouting in savage exultation, "Now, by heaven,
I've eased the grief of Patroclus' ghost a little—
though the man I battered down was half as great as he!"
With that he tossed the bloody gear in the chariot,
climbed aboard with his hands and feet dripping gore
like a lion that rends and bolts a bull.
And now, again,
the fight for Patroclus flared, stretched to the breaking point,
mounting in tears, in fury, since Pallas fired their blood,
sweeping down from the heavens, sent by the Father
thundering far and wide to drive the Argives on,
for now his mind had changed, at least for a moment.
Yes, down like a lurid rainbow Zeus sends arching
down to mortal men from the high skies, a sign of war
or blizzard to freeze the summer's warmth and put a halt
to men's work on the face of the earth and harry flocks—
so shrouded round in a lurid cloud came Pallas now
and dove in the Argive ranks to fire up each man.
And the first one she roused was Atreus' son
powerful Menelaus—he stood right at hand—
she took the build and tireless voice of Phoenix:
"Yours is the shame, Atrides. You will hang your head
if under the walls of Troy the dogs in all their frenzy
drag and maul the proud Achilles' steadfast friend.
Hold on, full force—spur all our men to battle!"
The lord of the war cry told the goddess quickly,
"Phoenix, father, good old soldier-if only Pallas
would give me power and drive the weapons off mel
Then I'd gladly stand and fight for Patroclus.
My comrade's death has cut me to the quick.
But Hector keeps his terrible fury blazing,
keeps his bronze spear stabbing
and never stops the slaughter—Zeus hands him glory!"
Her gray eyes afire, the goddess Pallas thrilled
that the man had prayed to her before all other gods.
She put fresh strength in his back, spring in his knees
and filled his heart with the horsefly's raw daring—
brush it away from a man's flesh and back it comes,
biting, attacking, crazed for sweet human blood.
With such raw daring she filled his dark heart
and he bestrode Patroclus, flung a gleaming spear—
and there was a Trojan, Eetion's son called Podes,
well-bred, wealthy, and Hector prized him most
in all the realm-a first-rate drinking friend . . .
As he sprang in flight the red-haired captain hit him,
splitting his belt, and bronze went ripping through his flesh
and down he went with a crash. Atrides hauled his corpse
from under the Trojans toward his own massing friends.
But Hector—Apollo stood by him and drove him on,
disguised as Phaenops, Asius' son Abydos-bom,
dearest to Hector of all his foreign guests.
Like him to the life, the deadly Archer taunted,
"Hector, what Achaean will ever fear you now?
Look how you cringe in the face of Menelaus,
no great fighter before this—a weakling, soft.
He's gone and snatched a corpse from under our noses,
single-handed he's taken down your trusted comrade
brave in the front ranks, Podes, Eetion's son."
A black cloud of grief came shrouding over Hector
but helmed in flashing bronze he hurtled through the front.
That very moment the son of Cronul; seized his storm-shield—
rippling and flaring bright—and shrouding Ida in dark clouds,
loosed a bolt with a huge crack of thunder, shook the shield,
gave the Trojans triumph and routed fear-struck Argives.
And the first to beat retreat, a Boeotian, Peneleos.
Charging forward as always, head-on, until Polydamas
speared his shoulder—just grazing its ridge
but grating bone—he thrust at point-blank range.
Close range too, Hector stabbed the wrist of Leitus,
brave Alectryon's son, and knocked him out of action.
No hope left he could wield a spear against the Trojans,
no more fighting now—Leitus looked around and ran.
But as Hector rushed him, Idomeneus speared Hector,
struck the plate on his chest beside the nipple—
his long spearshaft splintered off at the head
and the Trojans shouted out. And Hector hurled
at Idomeneus now aboard a chariot-missed by a hair
but he caught Meriones' aide and driver Coeranus,
one who'd come with his lord from rock-built Lyctus.
Idomeneus had left the ships on foot that morning
and would have offered the Trojans a fine triumph now
if Coeranus had not rushed to the rescue, lashed his team
and come like light to the king—
he saved his life that day
but he quickly lost his own to man-killing Hector—
Hector
speared him under the jaw and ear, knocking teeth out,
shattering roots and all and split his tongue in half.
He pitched from his car, the reins poured to the ground
and on foot Meriones grabbed them up in his hands,
shouting out at Idomeneus, "Whip them hard nowl
Back to the fast ships! You see for yourself—
no power left in the Argives."
So Meriones yelled
and Idomeneus whipped the team with their manes streaming,
back to the hollow ships—fear seized the king at last.
Lionhearted Ajax and Menelaus were not blind . . .
they saw Zeus turn the tide toward the Trojans.
Telamonian Ajax voiced frustration first:
"Dear god, enough! Any idiot boy could see
how Father Zeus himself supports these Trojans.
All their weapons land, no matter who flings them,
brave fighter or bad-Zeus guides them all to the mark.
Ours all clatter to ground. Wasted, harmless shots.
So come, alone as we are, find the best way out:
how do we pull the body clear and save ourselves,
make it back to our lines and bring our friends some joy?
They look our way in despair, they must. All hope gone
that murderous Hector's rage and invincible spear-arm
can be stopped—not now—
he'll hurl himself against our blackened hullsl
If only an aide could speed the word to Achilles.
I'm certain he has not heard the dreadful news
that his dear friend lies dead. Wherever I look,
no use, I cannot see the Achaean for the mission,
such swirling mist blots out the men and horses both.
O Father Zeus—draw our armies clear of the cloud,
give us a bright sky, give us back our sight!
Kill us all in the light of day at least—
since killing's now your pleasure!"
So he prayed
and the Father filled with pity, seeing Ajax weep.
He dispelled the mist at once,
drove off the cloud and the sun came blazing forth
and the whole war swung into view, clear, that instant—
and Ajax called the lord of the war cry, Menelaus:
"Look hard for Antilochus now, my royal friend.
If you see him still alive, brave Nestor's son,
tell him to run the news to great Achilles quickly—
his dearest friend-in-arms on earth lies dead."
And the lord of the battle cry could not refuse
but dragged his heels like a lion leaving sheepfolds,
bone-weary from harrying hounds and field hands.
They'll never let him tear the rich fat from the oxen,
all night long they stand their guard but the lion craves meat,
he lunges in and in but his charges gain him nothing,
thick-and-fast from their hardy hands the javelins
rain down in his face, and waves of roaring torches-—
these the big cat fears, balking for all his rage,
and at dawn he slinks away, his spirits dashed.
And so the lord of the war cry left Patroclus,
resisting all the way—he feared the worst:
stampeded in terror, his men would leave the body
easy prey for the Trojans. So here Menelaus paused
with much to command Meriones and the Aeantes:
"Ajax and Ajax, captains of Achaea, Meriones too,
remember Patroclus now, our stricken comrade!
That gentle man, the soul of kindness to all
while the man was still alive . . .
Now death and fate have got him in their grip."
And with that the red-haired captain moved ahead
like an eagle scanning left and right, the bird men say
has the sharpest eyes of all that fly the heavens:
high as he soars he'll never miss the racing hare
cowering down low in the dense, shaggy brush—
down on its head he swoops
and pins it fast and rips its life away. So now,
Menelaus 0 my King, you turned your shining eyes,
scanning the crowds of comrades front and rear,
trying to see if Nestor's son was still alive.
He marked him quickly, out on the left flank
and rousing cohorts, driving them back to war,
and the red-haired captain halted near and called,
"Turn this way, Antilochus, Prince, and hear the news,
dreadful news-would to god it had never happened!
You see for yourself, I know, how Father Zeus
sends waves of ruin breaking down our lines—
victory goes to Troy. Our best Achaean's dead—
Patroclus, a stunning loss to all our armies!
Quick, run to Achilles' moorings up the beach
and tell him all. Perhaps-but he must be fast—
he can bring the body safely back to his ship,
stripped as Patroclus is—
Hector with that flashing helmet has his armor."
Antilochus listened closely, hating every word.
He stood there speechless a while, struck dumb ...
tears filling his eyes, his strong voice choked.
But he still would not neglect Atrides' order.
So handing his gear to a loyal aide Laodocus,
who maneuvered his pawing horses close by,
he set off at a run.
But he wept freely now
as his feet swept him clear of the close fighting,
bearing the dreadful news to Peleus' son Achilles.
But you, Menelaus 0 my King, you had no heart
to defend the Pylians, hard-pressed as they were,
once their leader left, a heavy blow to his troops.
And putting the veteran Thrasymedes in command,
he ran back to bestride Patroclus' corpse again
and flanking the two Aeantes now, reported briskly,
"I sent Antilochus. He's off to the fast ships
to tell the swift Achilles. But I've little hope
he'll come at all—for all his rage at Hector.
How can he fight the Trojans without armor?
So come, alone as we are, find the best way out:
how do we pull the body clear and save ourselves
from the Trojan uproar, flee our death, our fate?"
The Great Telamonian Ajax answered firmly,
"All true, straight to the point, Lord Menelaus.
Quickly, you and Meriones shoulder up the body,
carry it off the lines. We're right behind you,
fighting the Trojans, fighting this Prince Hector.
The two Aeantes bearing the same fury, the same name—
and no strangers at standing up to slashing Ares,
each defending the other side-by-side."
So he urged
and up from the earth they caught the body in their arms,
hoisting it high above their heads with a great heave—
and Trojan forces crowding behind them shouted out
when they saw the Argive fighters lift the corpse.
They swept in like hounds that fling themselves
at a wounded boar before young hunters reach him,
darting in for a moment, keen to rip the boar apart
till he wheels at bay, ramping into the pack with all his power
and the hounds cringe and bolt and scatter left and right.
And so the Trojans kept on pressing, squad on squad,
stabbing away with swords and two-edged spears
till the two called Ajax wheeled against them hard
to make a stand—and they turned white, none had nerve
to charge forth now and fight it out for the corpse.
So they labored to haul Patroclus from the war,
back to the beaked ships as fighting flared behind them
wild as a flash fire, sprung out of nowhere, storming down
on a teeming city, houses caving in to the big blaze
as gale-winds whip it into a roaring conflagration.
So rose the relentless din of horse and fighting men
breaking against them now as they struggled back to shore.
Dead set as mules who put their backs in the labor . . .
dragging down from the cliffs along a stony trail
some roof-beam or a heavy ship timber, slogging on
till they nearly burst their hearts with sweat and labor—
so they strained to carry off the corpse. Right behind them
the two Aeantes held the Trojans off as a wooded rocky ridge
stretched out across an entire plain holds back a flood,
fighting off the killer-tides of the mounting rivers,
beating them all back to swamp the lowland flats—
none of their pounding waves can make a breakthrough.
So the two Aeantes kept on beating the Trojans off
but on they came, assaulting the rear, two in the lead,
Aeneas the son of Anchises flanking glorious Hector.
Flying before them now like clouds of crows or starlings
screaming murder, seeing a falcon dive in for the kill,
the hawk that wings grim death at smaller birds—
so pursued by Aeneas and Hector Argive fighters
raced, screaming death-cries, lust for battle lost
and masses of fine armor littered both sides of the trench
as the Argives fled in fear, no halt in the fighting, not now—
So the men fought on like a mass of whirling fire
as swift Antilochus raced the message toward Achilles.
Sheltered under his curving, beaked ships he found him,
foreboding, deep down, all that had come to pass.
Agonizing now he probed his own great heart:
"Why, why? Our long-haired Achaeans routed again,
driven in terror off the plain to crowd the ships, but why?
Dear gods, don't bring to pass the grief that haunts my heart—
the prophecy that mother revealed to me one time . . .
she said the best of the Myrmidons—while I lived—
would fall at Trojan hands and leave the light of day.
And now he's dead, I know it. Menoetius' gallant son,
my headstrong friend! And I told Patroclus clearly,
'Once you have beaten off the lethal fire, quick,
come back to the ships-you must not battle Hector!' "
As such fears went churning through his mind
the warlord Nestor's son drew near him now,
streaming warm tears, to give the dreaded message:
"Ah son of royal Peleus, what you must hear from me!
What painful news—would to god it had never happened!
Patroclus has fallen. They're fighting over his corpse.
He's stripped, naked—Hector with that flashing helmet,
Hector has your arms!"
So the captain reported.
A black cloud of grief came shrouding over Achilles.
Both hands clawing the ground for soot and filth,
he poured it over his head, fouled his handsome face
and black ashes settled onto his fresh clean war-shirt.
Overpowered in all his power, sprawled in the dust,
Achilles lay there, fallen . . .
tearing his hair, defiling it with his own hands.
And the women he and Patroclus carried off as captives
caught the grief in their hearts and keened and wailed,
out of the tents they ran to ring the great Achilles,
all of them beat their breasts with clenched fists,
sank to the ground, each woman's knees gave way.
Antilochus kneeling near, weeping uncontrollably,
clutched Achilles' hands as he wept his proud heart out—
for fear he would slash his throat with an iron blade.
Achilles suddenly loosed a terrible, wrenching cry
and his noble mother heard him, seated near her father,
the Old Man of the Sea in the salt green depths,
and she cried out in turn. And immortal sea-nymphs
gathered round their sister, all the Nereids dwelling
down the sounding depths, they all came rushing now—
Glitter, blossoming Spray and the swells' Embrace,
Fair-Isle and shadowy Cavern, Mist and Spindrift,
ocean nymphs of the glances pooling deep and dark,
Race-with-the-Waves and Headlands' Hope and Safe Haven,
Glimmer of Honey, Suave-and-Soothing, Whirlpool, Brilliance,
Bounty and First Light and Speeder of Ships and buoyant Power,
Welcome Home and Bather of Meadows and Master's Lovely Consort,
Gift of the Sea, Eyes of the World and the famous milk-white Calm
and Truth and Never-Wrong and the queen who rules the tides in beauty
and in rushed Glory and Healer of Men and the one who rescues kings
and Sparkler, Down-from-the-Cliffs, sleek-haired Strands of Sand
and all the rest of the Nereids dwelling down the depths.
The silver cave was shimmering full of sea-nymphs,
all in one mounting chorus beating their breasts
as Thetis launched the dirge: "Hear me, sisters,
daughters of Nereus, so you all will know it well—
listen to all the sorrows welling in my heart!
I am agony—
mother of grief and greatness—O my child!
Yes, I gave birth to a flawless, mighty son . . .
the splendor of heroes, and he shot up like a young branch,
like a fine tree I reared him-the orchard's crowning glory—
but only to send him off in the beaked ships to Troy
to battle Trojans! Never again will I embrace him
striding home through the doors of Peleus' house.
And long as- I have him with me, still alive,
looking into the sunlight, he is racked with anguish.
And I, I go to his side—nothing I do can help him.
Nothing. But go I shall, to see my darling boy,
to hear what grief has come to break his heart
while he holds back from battle."
So Thetis cried
as she left the cave and her sisters swam up with her,
all in a tide of tears, and billowing round them now
the ground swell heaved open. And once they reached
the fertile land of Troy they all streamed ashore,
row on row in a long cortege, the sea-nymphs
filing up where the Myrmidon ships lay hauled,
clustered closely round the great runner Achilles ...
As he groaned from the depths his mother rose before him
and sobbing a sharp cry, cradled her son's head in her hands
and her words were all compassion, winging pity: "My child—
why in tears? What sorrow has touched your heart?
Tell me, please. Don't harbor it deep inside you.
Zeus has accomplished everything you wanted,
just as you raised your hands and prayed that day.
All the sons of Achaea are pinned against the ships
and all for want of you-they suffer shattering losses."
And groaning deeply the matchless runner answered,
"O dear mother, true! All those burning desires
Olympian Zeus has brought to pass for me—
but what joy to me now? My dear comrade's dead—
Patroclus—the man I loved beyond all other comrades,
loved as my own life—I've lost him—Hector's killed him,
stripped the gigantic armor off his back, a marvel to behold—
my burnished gear! Radiant gifts the gods presented Peleus
that day they drove you into a mortal's marriage bed ...
I wish you'd lingered deep with the deathless sea-nymphs,
lived at ease, and Peleus carried home a mortal bride.
But now, as it is, sorrows, unending sorrows must surge
within your heart as well—for your own son's death.
Never again will you embrace him striding home.
My spirit rebels—I've lost the will to live,
to take my stand in the world of men-unless,
before all else, Hector's battered down by my spear
and gasps away his life, the blood-price for Patroclus,
Menoetius' gallant son he's killed and stripped!"
But Thetis answered, warning through her tears,
"You're doomed to a short life, my son, from all you say!
For hard on the heels of Hector's death your death
must come at once—"
"Then let me die at once"—
Achilles burst out, despairing-"since it was not my fate
to save my dearest comrade from his death! Look,
a world away from his fatherland he's perished,
lacking me, my fighting strength, to defend him.
But now, since I shall not return to my fatherland . . .
nor did I bring one ray of hope to my Patroclus,
nor to the rest of all my steadfast comrades,
countless ranks struck down by mighty Hector—
No, no, here I sit by the ships . . .
a useless, dead weight on the good green earth
I, no man my equal among the bronze-armed Achaeans,
not in battle, only in wars of words that others win.
If only strife could die from the lives of gods and men
and anger that drives the sanest man to flare in outrage—
bitter gall, sweeter than dripping streams of honey,
that swarms in people's chests and blinds like smoke—
just like the anger Agamemnon king of men
has roused within me now . . .
Enough.
Let bygones be bygones. Done is done.
Despite my anguish I will beat it down,
the fury mounting inside me, down by force.
But now I'll go and meet that murderer head-on,
that Hector who destroyed the dearest life I know.
For my own death, I'll meet it freely-whenever Zeus
and the other deathless gods would like to bring it on!
Not even Heracles fled his death, for all his power,
favorite son as he was to Father Zeus the King.
Fate crushed him, and Hera's savage anger.
And I too, if the same fate waits for me ...
I'll lie in peace, once I've gone down to death.
But now, for the moment, let me seize great glory!—
and drive some woman of Troy or deep-breasted Dardan
to claw with both hands at her tender cheeks and wipe away
her burning tears as the sobs come choking from her throat—
they'll learn that I refrained from war a good long time!
Don't try to hold me back from the fighting, mother,
love me as you do. You can't persuade me now."
The goddess of the glistening feet replied,
"Yes, my son, you're right. No coward's work,
to save your exhausted friends from headlong death.
But your own handsome war-gear lies in Trojan hands,
bronze and burnished-and Hector in that flashing helmet,
Hector glories in your armor, strapped across his back.
Not that he will glory in it long, I tell you:
his own destruction hovers near him now. Wait—
don't fling yourself in the grind of battle yet,
not till you see me coming back with your own eyes.
Tomorrow I will return to you with the rising sun,
bearing splendid arms from Hephaestus, god of fire!"
With that vow she turned away from her son
and faced and urged her sisters of the deep,
"Now down you go in the Ocean's folding gulfs
to visit father's halls-the Old Man of the Sea—
and tell him all. I am on my way to Olympus heights,
to the famous Smith Hephaestus—I pray he'll give my son
some fabulous armor full of the god's great fire!"
And under a foaming wave her sisters dove
as glistening-footed Thetis soared toward Olympus
to win her dear son an immortal set of arms.
And now,
as her feet swept her toward Olympus, ranks of Achaeans,
fleeing man-killing Hector with grim, unearthly cries,
reached the ships and the Hellespont's long shore.
As for Patroclus, there seemed no hope that Achaeans
could drag the corpse of Achilles' comrade out of range.
Again the Trojan troops and teams overtook the body
with Hector son of Priam storming fierce as fire.
Three times illustrious Hector shouted for support,
seized his feet from behind, wild to drag him off,
three times the Aeantes, armored in battle-fury
fought him off the corpse. But Hector held firm,
staking all on his massive fighting strength—
again and again he'd hurl himself at the melee,
again and again stand fast with piercing cries
but he never gave ground backward, not one inch.
The helmed Aeantes could no more frighten Hector,
the proud son of Priam, back from Patroclus' corpse
than shepherds out in the field can scare a tawny lion
off his kill when the hunger drives the beast claw-mad.
And now Hector would have hauled the body away
and won undying glory . . .
if wind-swift Iris had not swept from Olympus
bearing her message-Peleus' son must arm—
but all unknown to Zeus and the other gods
since Hera spurred her on. Halting near
she gave Achilles a flight of marching orders:
"To arms—son of Peleus! Most terrifying man alive!
Defend Patroclus! It's all for him, this merciless battle
pitched before the ships. They're mauling each other now,
Achaeans struggling to save the corpse from harm,
Trojans charging to haul it back to windy Troy.
Flashing Hector's far in the lead, wild to drag it off,
furious to lop the head from its soft, tender neck
and stake it high on the city's palisade.
Up with you—
no more lying low! Writhe with shame at the thought
Patroclus may be sport for the dogs of Troy!
Yours, the shame will be yours
if your comrade's corpse goes down to the dead defiled!"
But the swift runner replied, "Immortal Iris—
what god has sped you here to tell me this?"
Quick as the wind the rushing Iris answered,
"Hera winged me on, the illustrious wife of Zeus.
But the son of Cronus throned on high knows nothing,
nor does any other immortal housed on Olympus
shrouded deep in snow."
Achilles broke in quickly—
"How can I go to war? The Trojans have my gear.
And my dear mother told me I must not arm for battle,
not till I see her coming back with my own eyes—
she vowed to bring me burnished arms from the god of fire.
I know of no other armor. Whose gear could I wear?
None but Telamonian Ajax' giant shield.
But he's at the front, I'm sure, engaging Trojans,
slashing his spear to save Patroclus' body."
Quick as the wind the goddess had a plan:
"We know—we too—they hold your famous armor.
Still, just as you are, go out to the broad trench
and show yourself to the Trojans. Struck with fear
at the sight of you, they might hold off from attack
and Achaea's fighting sons get second wind,
exhausted as they are . . .
Breathing room in war is all too brief."
And Iris racing the wind went veering off
as Achilles, Zeus's favorite fighter, rose up now
and over his powerful shoulder Pallas slung the shield,
the tremendous storm-shield with all its tassels flaring—
and crowning his head the goddess swept a golden cloud
and from it she lit a fire to blaze across the field.
As smoke goes towering up the sky from out a town
cut off on a distant island under siege . . .
enemies battling round it, defenders all day long
trading desperate blows from their own city walls
but soon as the sun goes down the signal fires flash,
rows of beacons blazing into the air to alert their neighbors—
if only they'll come in ships to save them from disaster—
so now from Achilles' head the blaze shot up the sky.
He strode from the rampart, took his stand at the trench
but he would not mix with the milling Argive ranks.
He stood in awe of his mother's strict command.
So there he rose and loosed an enormous cry
and off in the distance Pallas shrieked out too
and drove unearthly panic through the Trojans.
Piercing loud as the trumpet's battle cry that blasts
from murderous raiding armies ringed around some city—
so piercing now the cry that broke from Aeacides.
And Trojans hearing the brazen voice of Aeacides,
all their spirits quaked—even sleek-maned horses,
sensing death in the wind, slewed their chariots round
and charioteers were struck dumb when they saw that fire,
relentless, terrible, burst from proud-hearted Achilles' head,
blazing as fiery-eyed Athena fueled the flames. Three times
the brilliant Achilles gave his great war cry over the trench,
three times the Trojans and famous allies whirled in panic—
and twelve of their finest fighters died then and there,
crushed by chariots, impaled on their own spears.
And now the exultant Argives seized the chance
to drag Patroclus' body quickly out of range
and laid him on a litter . . .
Standing round him, loving comrades mourned,
and the swift runner Achilles joined them, grieving,
weeping warm tears when he saw his steadfast comrade
lying dead on the bier, mauled by tearing bronze,
the man he sent to war with team and chariot
but never welcomed home again alive.
Now Hera the ox-eyed queen of heaven drove the sun,
untired and all unwilling, to sink in the Ocean's depths
and the sun went down at last and brave Achaeans ceased
the grueling clash of arms, the leveling rout of war.
And the Trojans in turn, far across the field,
pulling forces back from the last rough assault,
freed their racing teams from under chariot yokes
but before they thought of supper, grouped for council.
They met on their feet. Not one of them dared to sit
for terror seized them all—the great Achilles
who held back from the brutal fray so long
had just come blazing forth.
Panthous' son Polydamas led the debate,
a good clear head, and the only man who saw
what lay in the past and what the Trojans faced.
He was Hector's close comrade, born on the same night,
but excelled at trading words as he at trading spear-thrusts.
And now, with all good will, Polydamas rose and spoke:
"Weigh both sides of the crisis well, my friends.
What I urge is this: draw back to the city now.
Don't wait for the holy Dawn to find us here afield,
ranged by the ships—we're too far from our walls.
As long as that man kept raging at royal Agamemnon
the Argive troops were easier game to battle down.
I too was glad to camp the night on the shipways,
hopes soaring to seize their heavy rolling hulls.
But now racing Achilles makes my blood run cold.
So wild the man's fury he will never rest content,
holding out on the plain where Trojans and Argives
met halfway, exchanging blows in the savage onset—
never: he will fight for our wives, for Troy itself!
So retreat to Troy. Trust me—we will face disaster.
Now, for the moment, the bracing godsent night
has stopped the swift Achilles in his tracks.
But let him catch us lingering here tomorrow,
just as he rises up in arms—there may be some
who will sense his fighting spirit all too well.
You'll thank your stars to get back to sacred Troy,
whoever escapes him. Dogs and birds will have their fill—
of Trojan flesh, by heaven. Battalions of Trojans!
Pray god such grief will never reach my ears.
So follow my advice, hard as it may seem . . .
Tonight conserve our strength in the meeting place,
and the great walls and gates and timbered doors we hung,
well-planed, massive and bolted tight, will shield the city.
But tomorrow at daybreak, armed to the hilt for battle,
we man the towering ramparts. All the worse for him—
if Achilles wants to venture forth from the fleet,
fight us round our walls. Back to the ships he'll go,
once he's lashed the power out of his rippling stallions,
whipping them back and forth beneath our city walls.
Not even his fury will let him crash our gates—
he'll never plunder Troy.
Sooner the racing dogs will eat him raw!"
Helmet flashing, Hector wheeled with a dark glance:
"No more, Polydamas! Your pleading repels me now.
You say go back again—be crammed inside the city.
Aren't you sick of being caged inside those walls?
Time was when the world would talk of Priam's Troy
as the city rich in gold and rich in bronze—but now
our houses are stripped of all their sumptuous treasures,
troves sold off and shipped to Phrygia, lovely Maeonia,
once great Zeus grew angry . . .
But now, the moment the son of crooked Cronus
allows me to seize some glory here at the ships
and pin these Argives back against the sea—
you fool, enough! No more thoughts of retreat
paraded before our people. Not that one Trojan
will ever take your lead—I'll never permit it.
Come, follow my orders! All obey me now.
Take supper now. Take your posts through camp.
And no forgetting the watch, each man wide awake.
And any Trojan so weighed down, so oppressed
by his own possessions, let him collect the lot,
pass them round to the people-a grand public feast.
Far better for one of ours to reap the benefits
than all the marauding Argives. Then, as you say,
'tomorrow at daybreak, armed to the hilt for battle'—
we slash to attack against their deep curved hulls!
If it really was Achilles who reared beside the ships,
all the worse for him—if he wants his fill of war.
I for one, I'll never run from his grim assault,
I'll stand up to the man—see if he bears off glory
or I bear it off myself! The god of war is impartial:
he hands out death to the man who hands out death."
So Hector finished. The Trojans roared assent,
lost in folly. Athena had swept away their senses.
They gave applause to Hector's ruinous tactics,
none to Polydamas, who gave them sound advice.
And now their entire army settled down to supper
but all night long the Argives raised Patroclus' dirge.
And Achilles led them now in a throbbing chant of sorrow,
laying his man-killing hands on his great friend's chest,
convulsed with bursts of grief. Like a bearded lion
whose pride of cubs a deer-hunter has snatched away,
out of some thick woods, and back he comes, too late,
and his heart breaks but he courses after the hunter,
hot on his tracks down glen on twisting glen—
where can he find him?—gripped by piercing rage . . .
so Achilles groaned, deeply, crying out to his Myrmidons,
"O my captains! How empty the promise I let fall
that day I reassured Menoetius in his house-
I promised the king I'd bring him back his son,
home to Opois, covered in glory, Troy sacked,
hauling his rightful share of plunder home, home.
But Zeus will never, accomplish all our best-laid plans.
Look at us. Both doomed to stain red with our blood
the same plot of earth, a world away in Troy!
For not even I will voyage home again. Never.
No embrace in his halls from the old horseman Peleus
nor from mother, Thetis—this alien earth I stride
will hold me down at last.
But now, Patroclus,
since I will follow you underneath the ground,
I shall not bury you, no, not till I drag back here
the gear and head of Hector, who slaughtered you,
my friend, greathearted friend . . .
Here in front of your flaming pyre I'll cut the throats
of a dozen sons of Troy in all their shining glory,
venting my rage on them for your destruction!
Till then you lie as you are beside my beaked ships
and round you the Trojan women and deep-breasted Dardans
will mourn you night and day, weeping burning tears,
women we fought to win—strong hands and heavy lance—
whenever we sacked rich cities held by mortal men."
With that the brilliant Achilles ordered friends
to set a large three-legged cauldron over the fire
and wash the clotted blood from Patroclus' wounds
with all good speed. Hoisting over the blaze
a cauldron, filling it brimful with bathing water,
they piled fresh logs beneath and lit them quickly.
The fire lapped at the vessel's belly, the water warmed
and soon as it reached the boil in the glowing bronze
they bathed and anointed the body sleek with olive oil,
closed each wound with a soothing, seasoned unguent
and then they laid Patroclus on his bier . . .
covered him head to foot in a thin light sheet
and over his body spread the white linen shroud.
Then all night long, ringing the great runner Achilles,
Myrmidon fighters mourned and raised Patroclus' dirge.
But Zeus turned to Hera, his wife and sister, saying,
"So, my ox-eyed Queen, you've had your way at last,
setting the famous runner Achilles on his feet.
Mother Hera—look, these long-haired Achaeans
must be sprung of your own immortal loins."
But her eyes widening, noble Hera answered,
"Dread majesty, son of Cronus, what are you saying?
Even a mortal man will act to help a friend,
condemned as a mortal always is to death
and hardly endowed with wisdom deep as ours.
So how could I, claiming to be the highest goddess—
both by birth and since I am called your consort
and you in turn rule all the immortal gods—
how could I hold back from these, these Trojans,
men I loathe, and fail to weave their ruin?"
Now as the King and Queen provoked each other,
glistening-footed Thetis reached Hephaestus' house,
indestructible, bright as stars, shining among the gods,
built of bronze by the crippled Smith with his own hands.
There she found him, sweating, wheeling round his bellows,
pressing the work on twenty three-legged cauldrons,
an array to ring the walls inside his mansion.
He'd bolted golden wheels to the legs of each
so all on their own speed, at a nod from him,
they could roll to halls where the gods convene
then roll right home again—a marvel to behold.
But not quite finished yet . . .
the god had still to attach the inlaid handles.
These he was just fitting, beating in the rivets.
As he bent to the work with all his craft and cunning,
Thetis on her glistening feet drew near the Smith.
But Charis saw her first, Charis coming forward,
lithe and lovely in all her glittering headdress,
the Grace the illustrious crippled Smith had married.
Approaching Thetis, she caught her hand and spoke her name:
"Thetis of flowing robes! What brings you to our house?
A beloved, honored friend-but it's been so long,
your visits much too rare. Follow me in, please,
let me offer you all a guest could want."
Welcome words,
and the radiant goddess Charis led the way inside.
She seated her on a handsome, well-wrought chair,
studded with silver, under it slipped a stool
and called the famous Smith: "Hephaestus, come—
look who's here! Thetis would ask a favor of you!"
And the famous crippled Smith exclaimed warmly,
"Thetis—here? Ah then a wondrous, honored goddess
comes to grace our house! Thetis saved my life
when the mortal pain came on me after my great fall,
thanks to my mother's will, that brazen bitch,
she wanted to hide me-because I was a cripple.
What shattering anguish I'd have suffered then
if Thetis had not taken me to her breast, Eurynome too,
the daughter of Ocean's stream that runs around the world.
Nine years I lived with both, forging bronze by the trove,
elegant brooches, whorled pins, necklaces, chokers, chains—
there in the vaulted cave—and round us Ocean's currents
swirled in a foaming, roaring rush that never died.
And no one knew. Not a single god or mortal,
only Thetis and Eurynome knew-they saved me.
And here is Thetis now, in our own house!
So I must do all I can to pay her back,
the price for the life she saved . . .
the nymph of the sea with sleek and lustrous locks.
Quickly, set before her stranger's generous fare
while I put away my bellows and all my tools."
With that
he heaved up from the anvil block-his immense hulk
hobbling along but his shrunken legs moved nimbly.
He swung the bellows aside and off the fires,
gathered the tools he'd used to weld the cauldrons
and packed them all in a sturdy silver strongbox.
Then he sponged off his brow and both burly arms,
his massive neck and shaggy chest, pulled on a shirt
and grasping a heavy staff, Hephaestus left his forge
and hobbled on. Handmaids ran to attend their master,
all cast in gold but a match for living, breathing girls.
Intelligence fills their hearts, voice and strength their frames,
from the deathless gods they've learned their works of hand.
They rushed to support their lord as he went bustling on
and lurching nearer to Thetis, took his polished seat,
reached over to clutch her hand and spoke her name:
"Thetis of flowing robes! What brings yop to our house?
A beloved, honored friend-but it's been so long,
your visits much too rare.
Tell me what's on your mind. I am eager to do it—
whatever I can do . . . whatever can be done."
But Thetis burst into tears; her voice welling:
"Oh Hephaestus—who of all the goddesses on Olympus,
who has borne such withering sorrows in her heart?
Such pain as Zeus has given me, above all others!
Me out of all the daughters of the sea he chose
to yoke to a mortal man, Peleus, son of Aeacus,
and I endured his bed, a mortal's bed, resisting
with all my will. And now he lies in the halls,
broken with grisly age, but now my griefs are worse.
Remember? Zeus also gave me a son to bear and breed,
the splendor of heroes, and he shot up like a young branch,
like a fine tree I reared him—the orchard's crowning glory—
but only to send him off in the beaked ships to Troy
to battle Trojans! Never again will I embrace him
striding home through the doors of Peleus' house.
And long as I have him with me, still alive,
looking into the sunlight, he is racked with anguish.
I go to his side—nothing I do can help him. Nothing.
That girl the sons of Achaea picked out for his prize—
right from his grasp the mighty Agamemnon tore her,
and grief for her has been gnawing at his heart.
But then the Trojans pinned the Achaeans tight
against their sterns, they gave them no way out,
and the Argive warlords begged my son to help,
they named in full the troves of glittering gifts
they'd send his way. But at that point he refused
to beat disaster off—refused himself, that is—
but he buckled his own armor round Patroclus,
sent him into battle with an army at his back.
And all day long they fought at the Scaean Gates,
that very day they would have stormed the city too,
if Apollo had not killed Menoetius' gallant son
as he laid the Trojans low—Apollo cut him down
among the champions there and handed Hector glory.
So now I come, I throw myself at your knees,
please help me! Give my son—he won't live Tong—
a shield and helmet and tooled greaves with ankle-straps
and armor for his chest. All that he had was lost,
lost when the Trojans killed his steadfast friend.
Now he lies on the ground—his heart is breaking."
And the famous crippled Smith replied, "Courage!
Anguish for all that armor—sweep it from your mind.
If only I could hide him away from pain and death,
that day his grim destiny comes to take Achilles,
as surely as glorious armor shall be his, armor
that any man in the world of men will marvel at
through all the years to come—whoever sees its splendor."
With that he left her there and made for his bellows,
turning them on the fire, commanding, "Work-to work!"
And the bellows, all twenty, blew on the crucibles,
breathing with all degrees of shooting, fiery heat
as the god hurried on—a blast for the heavy work,
a quick breath for the light, all precisely gauged
to the god of fire's wish and the pace of the work in hand.
Bronze he flung in the blaze, tough, durable bronze
and tin and, priceless gold and silver, and then,
planting the huge anvil upon its block, he gripped
his mighty hammer in one hand, the other gripped his tongs.
And first Hephaestus makes a great and massive shield,
blazoning well-wrought emblems all across its surface,
raising a rim around it, glittering, triple-ply
with a silver shield-strap run from edge to edge
and five layers of metal to build the shield itself,
and across its vast expanse with all his craft and cunning
the god creates a world of gorgeous immortal work.
There he made the earth and there the sky and the sea
and the inexhaustible blazing sun and the moon rounding full
and there the constellations, all that crown the heavens,
the Pleiades and the Hyades, Orion in all his power too
and the Great Bear that mankind also calls the Wagon:
she wheels on her axis always fixed, watching the Hunter,
and she alone is denied a plunge in the Ocean's baths.
And he forged on the shield two noble cities filled
with mortal men. With weddings and wedding feasts in one
and under glowing torches they brought forth the brides
from the women's chambers, marching through the streets
while choir on choir the wedding song rose high
and the young men came dancing, whirling round in rings
and among them flutes and harps kept up their stirring call—
women rushed to the doors and each stood moved with wonder.
And the people massed, streaming into the marketplace
where a quarrel had broken out and two men struggled
over the blood-price for a kinsman just murdered.
One declaimed in public, vowing payment in full—
the other spurned him, he would not take a thing—
so both men pressed for a judge to cut the knot.
The crowd cheered on both, they took both sides,
but heralds held them back as the city elders sat
on polished stone benches, forming the sacred circle,
grasping in hand the staffs of clear-voiced heralds,
and each leapt to his feet to plead the case in turn.
Two bars of solid gold shone on the ground before them,
a prize for the judge who'd speak the straightest verdict.
But circling the other city camped a divided army
gleaming in battle-gear, and two plans split their ranks:
to plunder the city or share the riches with its people,
hoards the handsome citadel stored within its depths.
But the people were not surrendering, not at all.
They armed for a raid, hoping to break the siege—
loving wives and innocent children standing guard
on the ramparts, flanked by elders bent with age
as men marched out to war. Ares and Pallas led them,
both burnished gold, gold the attire they donned, and great,
magnificent in their armor—gods for all the world,
looming up in their brilliance, towering over troops.
And once they reached the perfect spot for attack,
a watering place where all the herds collected,
there they douched, wrapped in glowing bronze.
Detached from the ranks, two scouts took up their posts,
the eyes of the army waiting to spot a convoy,
the enemy's flocks and crook-homed cattle coming . . .
Come they did,. quickly, two shepherds behind them,
playing their hearts out on their pipes—treachery
never crossed their minds. But the soldiers saw them,
rushed them, cut off at a stroke the herds of oxen
and sleek sheep-flocks glistening silver-gray
and killed the herdsmen too. Now the besiegers,
soon as they heard the uproar burst from the cattle
as they debated, huddled in council, mounted at once
behind their racing teams, rode hard to the rescue,
arrived at once, and lining up for assault
both armies battled it out along the river banks—
they raked each other with hurtling bronze-tipped spears.
And Strife and Havoc plunged in the fight, and violent Death—
now seizing a man alive with fresh wounds, now one unhurt,
now hauling a dead man through the slaughter by the heels,
the cloak on her back stained red with human blood.
So they clashed and fought like living, breathing men
grappling each other's corpses, dragging off the dead.
And he forged a fallow field, broad rich plowland
tilled for the third time, and across it crews of plowmen
wheeled their teams, driving them up and back and soon
as they'd reach the end-strip, moving into the turn,
a man would run up quickly
and hand them a cup of honeyed, mellow wine
as the crews would turn back down along the furrows,
pressing again to reach the end of the deep fallow field
and the earth churned black behind them, like earth churning,
solid gold as it was—that was the wonder of Hephaestus' work.
And he forged a king's estate where harvesters labored,
reaping the ripe grain, swinging their whetted scythes.
Some stalks fell in line with the reapers, row on row,
and others the sheaf-binders girded round with ropes,
three binders standing over the sheaves, behind them
boys gathering up the cut swaths, filling their arms,
supplying grain to the binders, endless bundles.
And there in the midst the king,
scepter in hand at the head of the reaping-rows,
stood tall in silence, rejoicing in his heart.
And off to the side, beneath a spreading oak,
the heralds were setting out the harvest feast,
they were dressing a great ox they had slaughtered,
while attendant women poured out barley, generous,
glistening handfuls strewn for the reapers' midday meal.
And he forged a thriving vineyard loaded with clusters,
bunches of lustrous grapes in gold, ripening deep purple
and climbing vines shot up on silver vine-poles.
And round it he cut a ditch in dark blue enamel
and round the ditch he staked a fence in tin.
And one lone footpath led toward the vineyard
and down it the pickers ran
whenever they went to strip the grapes at, vintage—
girls and boys, their hearts leaping in innocence,
bearing away the sweet ripe fruit in wicker baskets.
And there among them a young boy plucked his lyre,
so clear it could break the heart with longing,
and what he sang was a dirge for the dying year,
lovely . . . his fine voice rising and falling low
as the rest followed, all together, frisking, singing,
shouting, their dancing footsteps beating out the time.
And he forged on the shield a herd of longhorn cattle,
working the bulls in beaten gold and tin, lowing loud
and rumbling out of the farmyard dung to pasture
along a rippling stream, along the swaying reeds.
And the golden drovers kept the herd in line,
four in all, with nine dogs at their heels,
their paws flickering quickly—a savage roar!—
a crashing attack—and a pair of ramping lions
had seized a bull from the cattle's front ranks—
he bellowed out as they dragged him off in agony.
Packs of dogs and the young herdsmen rushed to help
but the lions ripping open the hide of the huge bull
were gulping down the guts and the black pooling blood
while the herdsmen yelled the fast pack on-no use.
The hounds shrank from sinking teeth in the lions,
they balked, hunching close, barking, cringing away.
And the famous crippled Smith forged a meadow
deep in a shaded glen for shimmering flocks to graze,
with shepherds' steadings, well-roofed huts and sheepfolds.
And the crippled Smith brought all his art to bear
on a dancing circle, broad as the circle Daedalus
once laid out on Cnossos' spacious fields
for Ariadne the girl with lustrous hair.
Here young boys and girls, beauties courted
with costly gifts of oxen, danced and danced,
linking their arms, gripping each other's wrists.
And the girls wore robes of linen light and flowing,
the boys wore finespun tunics rubbed with a gloss of oil,
the girls were crowned with a bloom of fresh garlands,
the boys swung golden daggers hung on silver belts.
And now they would run in rings on their skilled feet,
nimbly, quick as a crouching potter spins his wheel,
palming it smoothly, giving it practice twirls
to see it run, and now they would run in rows,
in rows crisscrossing rows-rapturous dancing.
A breathless crowd stood round them struck with joy
and through them a pair of tumblers dashed and sprang,
whirling in leaping handsprings, leading on the dance.
And he forged the Ocean River's mighty power girdling
round the outmost rim of the welded indestructible shield.
And once the god had made that great and massive shield
he made Achilles a breastplate brighter than gleaming fire,
he made him a sturdy helmet to fit the fighter's temples,
beautiful, burnished work, and raised its golden crest
and made him greaves of flexing, pliant tin.
Now,
when the famous crippled Smith had finished off
that grand array of armor, lifting it in his arms
he laid it all at the feet of Achilles' mother Thetis—
and down she flashed like a hawk from snowy Mount Olympus
bearing the brilliant gear, the god of fire's gift.
As Dawn rose up in her golden robe from Ocean's tides,
bringing light to immortal gods and mortal men,
Thetis sped Hephaestus' gifts to the ships.
She found her beloved son lying facedown,
embracing Patroclus' body, sobbing, wailing,
and. round him crowded troops of mourning comrades.
And the glistening goddess moved among them now,
seized Achilles' hand and urged him, spoke his name:
"My child, leave your friend to lie there dead—
we must, though it breaks our hearts . . .
The will of the gods has crushed him once for all.
But here, Achilles, accept this glorious armor, look,
a gift from the god of fire—burnished bright, finer
than any mortal has ever borne across his back!"
Urging,
the goddess laid the armor down at Achilles' feet
and the gear clashed out in all its blazoned glory.
A tremor ran through all the Myrmidon ranks—none dared
to look straight at the glare, each fighter shrank away.
Not Achilles. The more he gazed, the deeper his anger went,
his eyes flashing under his eyelids, fierce as fire—
exulting, holding the god's shining gifts in his hands.
And once he'd thrilled his heart with looking hard
at the armor's well-wrought beauty,
he turned to his mother, winged words flying:
"Mother—armor sent by the god—you're right,
only immortal gods could forge such work,
no man on earth could ever bring it off!
Now, by heaven, I'll arm and go to war,
But all the while my blood runs cold with fear—
Menoetius' fighting son . . . the carrion blowflies
will settle into his wounds, gouged deep by the bronze,
worms will breed and seethe, defile the man's corpse—
his life's ripped out—his flesh may rot to nothing."
But glistening-footed Thetis reassured him:
"O my child, wipe these worries from your mind.
I'll find a way to protect him from those swarms,
the vicious flies that devour men who fall in battle.
He could lie there dead till a year has run its course
and his flesh still stand firm, even fresher than now . . .
So go and call the Argive warriors to the muster:
renounce your rage at the proud commander Agamemnon,
then arm for battle quickly, don your fighting power!"
With that she breathed in her son tremendous courage
then instilled in Patroclus' nostrils fresh ambrosia,
blood-red nectar too, to make his flesh stand firm.
But brilliant Achilles strode along the surf,
crying his piercing cry and roused Achaean warriors.
Even those who'd kept to the beached ships till now,
the helmsmen who handled the heavy steering-oars
and stewards left on board to deal out rations—
even they trooped to the muster: great Achilles
who held back from the brutal fighting so long
had just come blazing forth.
And along came two aides of Ares limping in,
the battle-hard Tydides flanked by good Odysseus
leaning on their spears, still bearing painful wounds,
and slowly found their seats in the front ranks.
And the lord of men Agamemnon came in last of all,
weighed down by the wound he took in the rough charge
when Coon, son of Anterior, slashed his arm with bronze.
And now, as all the Achaean armies massed together,
the swift runner Achilles rose among them, asking,
"Agamemnon—was it better for both of us, after all,
for you and me to rage at each other, raked by anguish,
consumed by heartsick strife, all for a young girl?
If only Arternis had cut her down at the ships—
with one quick shaft—
that day I destroyed Lyrnessus, chose her as my prize.
How many fewer friends had gnawed the dust of the wide world,
brought down by enemy hands while I raged on and on.
Better? Yes—for Hector and Hector's Trojans!
Not for the Argives. For years to come, I think,
they will remember the feud that flared between us both.
Enough. Let bygones be bygones. Done is done.
Despite my anguish I will beat it down,
the fury mounting inside me, down by force.
Now, by god, I call a halt to all my anger—
it's wrong to keep on raging, heart inflamed forever.
Quickly, drive our long-haired Achaeans to battle now!
So I can go at the Trojans once again and test their strength
and see if they still long to camp the night at the ships.
They'll gladly sink to a knee and rest at home, I'd say—
whoever comes through alive from the heat of combat,
out from under my spear!"
Welcome, rousing words,
and Achaeans-at-arms roared out with joy to hear
the greathearted Achilles swearing off his rage.
Now it was King Agamemnon's turn to. address them.
He rose from his seat, not moving toward the center.
The lord of men spoke out from where he stood:
"My friends, fighting Danaans, aides of Ares . . .
when a man stands up to speak, it's well to listen.
Not to interrupt him, the only courteous thing.
Even the finest speaker finds intrusions hard.
Yet how can a person hear or say a word?—
this howling din could drown the clearest voice.
But I will declare my inmost feelings to Achilles.
And you, the rest of you Argives, listen closely:
every man of you here, mark each word I say.
Often the armies brought this matter up against me—
they would revile me in public. But I am not to blame!
Zeus and Fate and the Fury stalking through the night,
they are the ones who drove that savage madness in my heart,
that day in assembly when I seized Achilles' prize—
on my own authority, true, but what could I do?
A god impels all things to their fulfillment:
Ruin, eldest daughter of Zeus, she blinds us all,
that fatal madness—she with those delicate feet of hers,
never touching the earth, gliding over the heads of men
to trap us all. She entangles one man, now another.
Why, she and her frenzy blinded Zeus one time,
highest, greatest of men and gods, they say:
even Father Zeus! Hera deceived him blind—
feminine as she is, and only armed with guile—
that day in Thebes, ringed with tower on tower,
Alcmena was poised to bear invincible Heracles.
So the proud Father declared to all immortals,
'Hear me, all you gods and all goddesses too,
as I proclaim what's brooding deep inside me.
Today the goddess of birth pangs and labor
will bring to light a human child, a man-child
born of the stock of men who spring from my blood,
one who will lord it over all who dwell around him.'
But teeming with treachery noble Hera set her trap,
'You will prove a liar . . .
when the time arrives to crown your words with action.
Come now, my Olympian, swear your inviolate oath
that he shall lord it over all who dwell around him—
that child who drops between a woman's knees today,
born of the stock of men who spring from Zeus's blood.'
And Zeus suspected nothing, not a word of treachery.
He swore his mighty oath—blinded, from that hour on.
Speeding down in a flash from Mount Olympus' summit
Hera reached Achaean Argos in no time, where,
she knew for a fact, the hardy wife of Sthenelus,
Perseus' own son, was about to bear her child,
but only seven months gone. So into the light
Queen Hera brought the baby, two months shy,
and the goddess stopped Alcmena's hour of birth,
she held back the Lady of Labor's birthing pangs
and rushed in person to give the word to Zeus:
'Zeus, Father, lord of the lightning bolt—
here is a piece of news to warm your heart!
Today an illustrious son is born to rulee the Argives . . .
Eurystheus, son of Sthenelus, descended of Perseus—
so he is born of your own stock and immortal blood
and it's only right for him to rule the Argivest'
With that, a stab of agony struck his deep heart.
Suddenly seizing Ruin by her glossy oiled braids—
he was furious, raging—now he swore his inviolate oath
that never again would she return to Olympus' starry skies,
that maddening goddess, Ruin, Ruin who blinds us all.
With that he whirled her round in his massive hand
and flung her out of the brilliant, starry skies
and she soon found herself in the world of men.
But Zeus could never think of Ruin without a groan
whenever he saw Heracles, his own dear son endure
some shameful labor Eurystheus forced upon him.
And so with me, I tell you!
When tall Hector with that flashing helmet of his
kept slaughtering Argives pinned against our ships—
how could I once forget that madness, that frenzy,
the Ruin that blinded me from that first day?
But since I was blinded and Zeus stole my wits,
I am intent on setting things to rights, at once:
I'11 give that priceless ransom paid for friendship.
Gear up for battle now! And rouse the rest of your armies!
As for the gifts, here I am to produce them all,
all that good Odysseus promised you in full,
the other day, when he approached your tents.
Or if you prefer, hold off a moment now . . .
much as your heart would spur you on to war.
Aides will fetch that treasure trove from my ship,
they'll bring it here to you, so you can behold
what hoards I'll give to set your heart at peace."
But the swift runner Achilles broke in sharply—
"Field marshal Atrides, lord of men Agamemnon,
produce the gifts if you like, as you see fit,
or keep them back, it's up to you. But now—
quickly, call up the wild joy of war at once!
It's wrong to malinger here with talk, wasting time—
our great work lies all before us, still to do.
Just as you see Achilles charge the front once more,
hurling his bronze spear, smashing Troy's battalions—
so each of you remember to battle down your man!"
But Odysseus fine at tactics answered firmly,
"Not so quickly, brave as you are, godlike Achilles.
Achaea's troops are hungry: don't drive them against- Troy
to fight the Trojans. It's no quick skirmish shaping,
once the massed formations of men begin to clash
with a god breathing fury in both sides at once.
No, command them now to take their food and wine
by the fast ships—a soldier's strength and nerve.
No fighter can battle all day long, cut-and-thrust
till the sun goes down, if he is starved for food.
Even though his courage may blaze up for combat,
his limbs will turn to lead before he knows it,
thirst and hunger will overtake him quickly,
his knees will cave in as the man struggles on.
But the one who takes his fill of food and wine
before he grapples enemies full force, dawn to dusk—
the heart in his chest keeps pounding fresh with courage,
nor do his legs give out till all break off from battle.
Come, dismiss your ranks, have them make their meal.
As for the gifts, let the king of men Agamemnon
have the lot of them hauled amidst our muster,
so all the troops can see the trove themselves
and you, Achilles, you can warm your heart.
And let the king stand up before the entire army,
let Agamemnon swear to you his solemn, binding oath:
he never mounted her bed, never once made love with her,
the natural thing, my lord, men and women joined.
And you, Achilles, show some human kindness too,
in your own heart. Then, as a peace offering,
let him present you a lavish feast in his tents
so you won't lack your just deserts at last.
And you, great son of Atreus . . .
you be more just to others, from now on.
It is no disgrace for a king to appease a man
when the king himself was first to give offense."
The lord of men Agamemnon answered warmly,
"Son of Laertes, I delight to hear your counsel!
You have covered it all fairly, point by point.
I'll gladly swear your oath—the spirit moves me now—
nor will I break that oath in the eyes of any god.
But let Achilles remain here, for the moment,
much as his heart would race him into war.
The rest remain here too, all in strict formation,
till the treasure trove is hauled forth from my tents
and we can seal our binding oaths in blood.
And you, Odysseus, I tell you, I command you:
pick out young men, the best in our joint forces,
bring forth the gifts from my ship, all we promised
Achilles just the other day, and bring the women too.
Here in the presence of our united armed contingents
let Talthybius quickly prepare a wild boar for me—
we must sacrifice to the Sun and Father Zeus."
But the swift runner Achilles interjected,
"Field marshal Atrides, lord of men Agamemnon,
better busy yourself with that some other time,
when a sudden lull in the fighting lets us rest
and the fury's not such fire inside my heart.
Now our men are lying mauled on the field—
all that Hector the son of Priam overwhelmed
when Zeus was handing Hector his high glory—
but you, you and Odysseus urge us to a banquet!
I, by god, I'd drive our Argives into battle now,
starving, famished, and only then, when the sun goes down,
lay on a handsome feast—once we've avenged our shame.
Before then, for me at least, neither food nor drink
will travel down my throat, not with my friend dead,
there in my shelter, torn to shreds by the sharp bronze . . .
His feet turned to the door, stretched out for burial,
round him comrades mourning.
You talk of food?
I have no taste for food—what I really crave
is slaughter and blood and the choking groans of men!"
But Odysseus, cool tactician, tried to calm him:
"Achilles, son of Peleus, greatest of the Achaeans,
greater than I, stronger with spears by no small edge—
yet I might just surpass you in seasoned judgment
by quite a lot, since I have years on you
and I know the world much better . . .
So let your heart be swayed by what I say,
Now fighting men will sicken of battle quickly:
the more dead husks the bronze strews on the ground
the sparser the harvest then, when Zeus almighty
tips his scales and the tide of battle turns—
the great steward on high who rules our mortal wars.
You want the men to grieve for the dead by starving?
Impossible. Too many falling, day after day—battalions!
When could we find a breathing space from fasting?
No. We must steel our hearts. Bury our dead,
with tears for the day they die, not one day more.
And all those left alive, after the hateful carnage,
remember food and drink—so all the more fiercely
we can fight our enemies, nonstop, no mercy,
durable as the bronze that wraps our bodies.
Let no one hold back now, waiting further summons—
these are your summons: pain and death to the man
who skulks beside the ships! Now, all in a mass,
drive hard against them—rousing battering war
against these stallion-breaking Trojans!"
He led an escort
formed of the brave old soldier Nestor's sons,
Meges the son of Phyleus, Meriones and Thoas,
Lycomedes the son of Creon, Melanippus too.
Off they went to the tents of Agamemnon—
a few sharp commands and the work was done.
Seven tripods hauled from the tents, as promised,
twenty burnished cauldrons, a dozen massive stallions.
They quickly brought out women, flawless, skilled in crafts,
seven, and Briseis in all her beauty made the eighth.
Then Odysseus weighed out ten full bars of gold
and led the princes back, laden with other gifts,
and they set them down amid the meeting grounds.
Agamemnon rose to his feet.
The crier Talthybius, his voice clear as a god's,
holding the boar in his arms, flanked the great commander.
And Atreus' son drew forth the dagger always slung
at his battle-sword's big sheath, he cut some hairs
from the boar's head, first tufts to start the rite,
and lifting up his arms to Zeus on high he prayed
while the armies held fast to their seats in silence,
all by rank and file, listening to their king.
He scanned the vaulting skies as his voice rang in prayer:
"Zeus be my witness first, the highest, best of gods!
Then Earth, the Sun, and Furies stalking the world below
to wreak revenge on the dead who broke their oaths—
I swear I never laid a hand on the girl Briseis,
I never forced her to serve my lust in bed
or perform some other task . . .
Briseis remained untouched within my tents.
True. If a word of what I say is falsely sworn,
may the gods deal out such blows to me, such agonies
as they deal out to the men who break sworn oaths
and take their names in vain!"
On those terms
he dragged his ruthless dagger across the boar's throat.
Talthybius whirled the carcass round about his head
and slung it into the yawning gulf of the gray sea
for swarming fish to eat. Then Prince Achilles stood
and addressed the Argives keen for battle: "Father Zeus—
great are the blinding frenzies you deal out to men!
If not, I swear, Atrides could never have roused
the fury in me, the rage that would not die,
or wrenched the girl away against my will—
stubborn, implacable man. But Zeus, somehow,
was bent on this awesome slaughter of Achaeans.
Go now, take your meal-the sooner to bring on war."
This brusque command dispersed the muster quickly.
The contingents scattered, each to its own ship.
Exultant Myrmidons took charge of the gifts
and bore them off to their royal captain's moorings.
They stowed them safe in his shelters, settled the women
and proud henchmen drove the teams to his herds.
And so Briseis returned, like golden Aphrodite,
but when she saw Patroclus lying torn by the bronze
she flung herself on his body, gave a piercing cry
and with both hands clawing deep at her breasts,
her soft throat and lovely face, she sobbed,
a woman like a goddess in her grief, "Patroclus—
dearest joy of my heart, my harrowed, broken heart!
I left you alive that day I left these shelters,
now I come back to find you fallen, captain of armies!
So grief gives way to grief, my life one endless sorrow!
The husband to whom my father and noble mother gave me,
I saw him torn by the sharp bronze before our city,
and my three brothers—a single mother bore us:
my brothers, how I loved you!—
you all went down to death on the same day .. .
But you, Patroclus, you would not let me weep,
not when the swift Achilles cut my husband down,
not when he plundered the lordly Mynes' city—
not even weep! No, again and again you vowed
you'd make me godlike Achilles' lawful, wedded wife,
you would sail me west in your warships, home to Phthia
and there with the Myrmidons hold my marriage feast.
So now I mourn your death—I will never stop—
you were always kind."
Her voice, rang out in tears
and the women wailed in answer, grief for Patroclus
calling forth each woman's private sorrows.
But Achaea's warlords clustered round Achilles,
begging him to eat. He only spurned them, groaning,
"I beg you—if any comrade will hear me out in this—
stop pressing me now to glut myself with food and drink,
now such painful grief has come and struck my heartl
I'll hold out till the sun goes down-enduring—
fasting-despite your appeals."
His voice so firm
that Achilles caused the other kings to scatter.
But the two Atridae stayed, and good Odysseus,
Nestor, Idomeneus, Phoenix the old charioteer,
all trying to comfort Achilles deep in sorrow.
But no comfort could reach the fighter's heart
till he went striding into the jaws of bloody war.
The memories swept over him . . .
sighs heaved from his depths as Achilles burst forth,
"Ah god, time and again, my doomed, my dearest friend,
you would set before us a seasoned meal yourself,
here in our tents, in your quick and expert way,
when Argive forces rushed to fight the Trojans,
stampeding those breakers of horses into rout.
But now you lie before me, hacked to pieces here
while the heart within me fasts from food and drink
though stores inside are full—
I'm sick with longing for you!
There is no more shattering blow that I could suffer.
Not even if I should learn of my own father's death,
who, this moment, is weeping warm tears in Phthia,
I know it, bereft of a son as loved as this . . .
and here I am in a distant land, fighting Trojans,
and all for that blood-chilling horror, Helen!—
or the death of any dear son, reared for me in Scyros,
if Prince Neoptolemus is still among the living.
Till now I'd hoped, hoped with all my heart
that I alone would die
far from the stallion-land of Argos, here in Troy,
but you, Patroclus, would journey back to Phthia
and then you'd ferry Neoptolemus home from Scyros,
fast in your black ship, and show him all my wealth,
my servingmen, my great house with the high vaulting roof.
For father, I fear—if he's not dead and buried yet—
just clings, perhaps, to his last breath of life,
ground down now by the hateful siege of years,
waiting, day after day, for painful news of me—
until he learns his only son is dead."
His voice rang out in tears and the warlords mourned in answer,
each remembering those he had left behind at home.
Seeing their grief the Father, filled with pity,
quickly turned to Athena with winging words:
"My child, have you abandoned him forever?
Your favorite man of war. Is it all lost now?—
no more care for Achilles left inside your heart?
There he huddles before his curving, beaked ships,
racked with grief for his dear friend while others scatter,
settling down to their meal. He's fasting, never fed.
Go. Run and instill some nectar and sweet ambrosia
deep within his chest. Stave off his hunger now."
So he urged Athena already poised for action.
Down the sky she swooped through the clear bright air
like a shrieking, sharp-winged hawk, and while Achaeans
quickly armed throughout the encampment, she instilled
some nectar and sweet ambrosia deep in Achilles' chest
so the stabbing pangs of hunger could not sap his knees.
Then back to her mighty Father's sturdy halls she went
as troops moved out, pouring out of the fast trim ships.
Thick-and-fast as the snow comes swirling down from Zeus,
frozen sharp when the North Wind born in heaven blasts it on—
so massed, so dense the glistening burnished helmets shone,
streaming out of the ships, and shields with jutting bosses,
breastplates welded front and back and the long ashen spears.
The glory of armor lit the skies and the whole earth laughed,
rippling under the glitter of bronze, thunder resounding
under trampling feet of armies. And in their midst
the brilliant Achilles began to arm for battle . . .
A sound of grinding came from the fighter's teeth,
his eyes blazed forth in searing points of fire,
unbearable grief came surging through his heart
and now, bursting with rage against the men of Troy,
he donned Hephaestus' gifts—magnificent armor
the god of fire forged with all his labor.
First he wrapped his legs with well-made greaves,
fastened behind his heels with silver ankle-clasps,
next he strapped the breastplate round his chest
then over his shoulder Achilles slung his sword,
the fine bronze blade with its silver-studded hilt,
then hoisted the massive shield flashing far and wide
like a full round moon—and gleaming bright as the light
that reaches sailors out at sea, the flare of a watchfire
burning strong in a lonely sheepfold up some mountain slope
when the gale-winds hurl the crew that fights against them
far over the fish-swarming sea, far from loved ones—
so the gleam from Achilles' well-wrought blazoned shield
shot up and hit the skies. Then lifting his rugged helmet
he set it down on his brows, and the horsehair crest
shone like a star and the waving golden plumes shook
that Hephaestus drove in bristling thick along its ridge.
And brilliant Achilles tested himself in all his gear,
Achilles spun on his heels to see if it fitted tightly,
see if his shining limbs ran free within it, yes,
and it felt like buoyant wings lifting the great captain.
And then, last, Achilles drew his father's spear
from its socket-stand—weighted, heavy, tough.
No other Achaean fighter could heft that shaft,
only Achilles had the skill to wield it well:
Pelian ash it was, a gift to his father Peleus
presented by Chiron once, hewn on Pelion's crest
to be the death of heroes.
Now the war-team—
Alcimus and Automedon worked to yoke them quickly.
They cinched the supple breast-straps round their chests
and driving the bridle irons home between their jaws,
pulled the reins back taut to the bolted chariot.
Seizing a glinting whip, his fist on the handgrip,
Automedon leapt aboard behind the team and behind him
Achilles struck his stance, helmed for battle now,
glittering in his armor like the sun astride the skies,
his ringing, daunting voice commanding his father's horses:
"Roan Beauty and Charger, illustrious foals of Lightfoot!
Try hard, do better this time—bring your charioteer
back home alive to his waiting Argive comrades
once we're through with fighting. Don't leave Achilles
there on the battlefield as you left Patroclus—dead!"
And Roan Beauty the horse with flashing hoofs
spoke up from under the yoke, bowing his head low
so his full mane came streaming down the yoke-pads,
down along the yoke to sweep the ground . . .
The white-armed goddess Hera gave him voice:
"Yes! we will save your life—this time too—
master, mighty Achilles! But the day of death
already hovers near, and we are not to blame
but a great god is and the strong force of fate.
Not through our want of speed or any lack of care
did the Trojans strip the armor off Patroclus' back.
It was all that matchless god, sleek-haired Leto's son—
he killed him among the champions and handed Hector glory.
Our team could race with the rush of the West Wind,
the strongest, swiftest blast on earth, men say—
still you are doomed to die by force, Achilles,
cut down by a deathless god and mortal man!"
He said no more. The Furies struck him dumb.
But the fiery runner Achilles burst out in anger,
"Why, Roan Beauty—why prophesy myy doom?
Don't waste your breath. I know, well I know—
I am destined to die here, far from my dear father,
far from mother. But all the same I will never stop
till I drive the Trojans to their bloody fill of war!"
A high stabbing cry—
and out in the front ranks he drove his plunging stallions.
So by the beaked ships the Argives formed for battle,
arming round you, Achilles—Achilles starved for war—
and faced by the Trojan ranks along the plain's high ground.
At the same time, from the peak of rugged ridged Olympus
Zeus commanded Themis to call the gods to council.
Themis made her rounds, ranging far and wide
and summoned all to march to Father's halls.
Not a single river failed to come, none apart
from the Ocean stream that holds the earth in place,
nor a single nymph who haunts the rustling groves
and the river springs and the lush, grassy meadows.
All flocked to the halls of Zeus who gathers storms
and found their seats in the colonnades of polished stone
Hephaestus built for Father Zeus with all his craft and cunning.
And so the powers assembled deep in Zeus's halls.
Nor did the god of earthquakes fail to hear the goddess.
Surging up from the sea he came to join their ranks,
took a seat in their midst and probed Zeus's plans:
"Why now, great king of the lightning,
why summon the gods to council once again?
Still some concern for Troy's and Achaea's armies?—
now that battle is set to burst in flames between them!"
But Zeus who marshals the thunderheads replied,
"God of the earthquake, well you know my plans,
the strategy in my mind, and why I call you here
These mortals do concern me, dying as they are.
Still, here I stay on Olympus throned aloft,
here in my steep mountain cleft, to feast my eyes
and delight my heart. The rest of you: down you go,
go to Trojans, go to Achaeans. Help either side
as the fixed desire drives each god to act.
If Achilles fights the Trojans—unopposed by us—
not for a moment will they hold his breakneck force.
Even before now they'd shake to see him coming.
Now, with his rage inflamed for his friend's death,
I fear he'll raze the walls against the will of fate."
And with that command Zeus roused incessant battle.
Down the immortals launched to the field of action—
their warring spirits split the gods two ways.
Hera went to the massed ships with Pallas Athena,
Poseidon who grips the earth, and Hermes god of luck
who excels them all at subtle twists and tactics—
and the god of fire flanked them, seething power,
hobbling along but his shrunken legs moved nimbly.
But Ares swept down to the Trojans, helmet flashing,
and pacing him went Phoebus with long hair streaming
and Artemis showering arrows, Leto and River Xanthus
and goddess Aphrodite strong with eternal laughter.
Now, while the gods had still kept clear of mortal men,
the Achaeans kept on gaining glory-great Achilles
who held back from the brutal fighting so long
had just come blazing forth. Chilling tremors
shook the Trojans' knees, down to the last man,
terrified at the sight: the headlong runner coming,
gleaming in all his gear, afire like man-destroying Ares.
But once the Olympians merged with mortal fighters,
Strife the mighty driver of armies rose in strength
and Athena bellowed her stunning war cry—standing now
at the edge of the deep-dug trench outside the rampart,
now at thundering cliffs she loosed her vibrant cry.
And Ares bellowed his cry from far across the lines,
churning black as a whirlwind, roaring down now
from the city's crest, commanding Trojans on and now
rushing along the Simois banks and scaling Sunlight Hill.
So the blissful gods were rousing both opposing armies,
clashing front to front but then, in their own ranks,
their overpowering strife broke out in massive war.
Down from the high skies the father of men and gods
let loose tremendous thunder-from down below Poseidon
shook the boundless earth and towering heads of mountains.
The whole world quaked, the slopes of Ida with all her springs
and all her peaks and the walls of Troy and all Achaea's ships.
And terror-struck in the underworld, Hades lord of the dead
cringed and sprang from his throne and screamed shrill,
fearing the god who rocks the ground above his realm,
giant Poseidon, would burst the earth wide open now
and lay bare to mortal men and immortal gods at last
the houses of the dead—the dank, moldering horrors
that fill the deathless gods themselves with loathing.
So immense the clash as the war of gods erupted.
There, look, rearing against the lord Poseidon
Phoebus Apollo loomed, bristling winged arrows,
rearing against Ares, blazing-eyed Athena,
rearing against Hera, Artemis with arrow of gold
???
and cry that halloos' the hunt, the goddess raining shafts,
Huntress sister of Phoebus the distant deadly Archer—
rearing against Leto, Hermes the running god of luck
and against the Fire-god rose the great deep-swirling river
immortals call the Xanthus, mankind calls Scamander.
So god went up against god. But blazing Achilles
strained to engage Prince Hector, plunge in battle
with him beyond all others—Achilles yearning now
to glut with Hector's blood, his, no other,
Ares who hacks at men behind his rawhide shield.
But Aeneas it was whom Phoebus, urger of armies,
filled with power now and drove against Achilles.
Phoebus, masking his voice like Priam's son Lycaon,
like him to the life the son of Zeus called out,
"Captain of Trojan councils—where have they gone,
those threats you made in your cups before the kings?
Boasting you'd face Achilles man-to-man in battle!"
But Aeneas turned and gave the god an answer:
"Son of Priam, why press me to go against Achilles?
It's much against my will-his fury is overwhelming.
Nor would it be the first time I have had to face
the matchless, headlong runner. Once before
he chased me hard with his spear, down from Ida
the day he raided our flocks and sacked Lyrnessus,
Pedasus fort as well. But Zeus saved me then,
put force in my heart, spring in my racing knees.
Else I'd gone down at Achilles' hands, Athena's too—
the goddess sweeping before him lent the light of safety,
calling Achilles on that day with his bronze spear
to slaughter Leleges and Trojans. That is why
no mortal can fight Achilles head-to-head:
at every foray one of the gods goes with him,
beating back his death. Even without that power
his spear flies straight to the mark, never stops,
not till it bores clean through some fighter's flesh.
But if only Zeus would stretch the ropes of war dead even
the man would have no easy victory then, believe me—
not though he claims he's built of solid bronze!"
Apollo son of Zeus encouraged him still more:
"Hero, why not invoke the deathless gods yourself?
They say you're a son of Aphrodite, Zeus's daughter,
but Achilles sprang from a lesser goddess' loins—
Aphrodite's a child of Zeus,
Thetis comes from the Old Man of the Sea.
So ram him straight on with your tough bronze!
Now—and not for a moment let him turn you back
with his stinging proud contempt and brazen threats!"
That breathed enormous strength in the good captain—
right through the front he went, helmed in flashing bronze.
Nor did the white-armed Hera fail to see Anchises' son
advancing there through the press to face Achilles.
And rallying other gods around her, Hera shouted,
"Bend to the work, you two, Poseidon, Athena,
decide in your hearts how this assault will go!
Here comes Aeneas, look, helmed in flashing bronze
to oppose Achilles now and Phoebus speeds him on.
Come, spin him round in his tracks and drive him back.
That, or else one of us might stand beside Achilles
and lend him winning force-his courage must not flag.
Let him know he's loved by the greatest gods on high
while the gods who up till now have shielded Troy
from war and death are worthless as the wind!
We swept down from Olympus, all to join this fight
so Achilles might not fall at Trojan hands today.
Afterward he must suffer what the Fates spun out
on the doomed fighter's life line drawn that day
his mother gave him birth. If Achilles fails
to learn all this from our own immortal voices
he will quail when a god attacks him face-to-face.
The gods are hard to handle—
when they come blazing forth in their true power."
But the god who grips the earth restrained the Queen:
"Hera, so hard, so senseless! Don't leap to extremes..
I, at least, have no real lust to drive our forces
against the gods of Troy. Our side is so much stronger.
Come now, let us move off and settle down together
far from the trampled field, take a lookout post
and leave the war to mortals . . .
But if Ares or Phoebus cares to start things off,
if they block Achilles and keep him out of action,
they will have a fight on their hands, then and there,
an all-out fight with us. But not for long, I trust—
they will soon break off and slink back to Olympus,
home to the gathered gods who wait their coming,
overwhelmed by the crushing power of our fists!"
And with that threat the god of the sea-blue mane
led the way to the fortress raised for godlike Heracles:
earth piled on both sides, a high imposing breastwork
men of Troy and Pallas Athena flung up for the man
where he could race and escape that sea monster
whenever it charged him hard from shore to plain.
There Poseidon sat at ease with his deathless friends
who spread unbroken shrouds of mist around their shoulders,
while far on the other side the gods of Troy sat down
on the brows of Sunlight Hill, flanking you, Apollo,
god of the wild cry, and Ares scourge of cities.
So either side of the lines they took positions,
weighing tactics, each Olympian force reluctant now
to launch out first on the wrenching horrors of war . . .
while Zeus on the heights sat poised to thunder orders.
But the whole plain filled with men and flashed with bronze,
with troops and horse and beneath their feet the earth quaked
as armies rushed together. And now in the no man's land
two champions, greatest of all, strode and closed,
both men burning for battle,
Aeneas son of Anchises and brilliant Achilles.
Aeneas came up first with long, menacing strides,
head tossing his heavy helmet, his charging shield
thrust out to defend his chest, and shook his bronze spear.
But over against him came Achilles rearing like some lion
out on a rampage, and a whole town of men has geared
for the hunt to cut him down: but at first he lopes along,
all contempt, till one of the fast young hunters spears him—
then . . . crouched for attack, his jaws gaping, over his teeth
the foam breaks out, deep in his chest the brave heart groans,
he lashes his ribs, his flanks and hips with his tail,
he whips himself into fighting-fury, eyes glaring,
hurls himself head-on—kill one of the men or die,
go down himself at the first lethal charge!
So now magnificent pride and fury lashed Achilles
to go against Aeneas the greathearted fighter.
As they closed on each other, both in range,
the matchless runner Achilles opened up: "Aeneas—
why so far from your own ranks, standing all exposed?
Does your courage really drive you to challenge me?
In hopes of ruling your stallion-breaking friends
and filling Priam's throne? Even if you killed me,
would Priam drop his crown in your hands-for that?
The king has sons. He's sound of limb. No half-wit either.
Or have the Trojans sworn to carve you a fine estate?
The choicest land in the realm, rich in vineyards
and good tilled fields for you to lord it over—
if only you kill me!
Ah but I think you'll find the work quite taxing.
I seem to remember once before you fled my spear . . .
Or have you forgot the time I caught you all alone,
I cut you off from your flocks and sent you scurrying down
the slopes of Ida? Running for dear life, legs driving,
never a look behind. And you escaped that time,
you fled to Lyrnessus' walls, but at one charge
I sacked the place with Athena's help and Father Zeus,
I tore the day of freedom away from all the women,
dragged them off as slaves. Zeus saved you then
and other gods joined in. But he won't save you now,
I'd say—though the hope goes racing through your mind.
Go back to your own rank and file, I tell youl
Don't stand up against me—or you will meet your death.
Even a fool learns something once it hits him."
But Aeneas, taking a long, deep breath, replied,
"Don't think for a moment, Achilles, son of Peleus,
you can frighten me with words like a child, a fool—
I'm an old hand myself at trading taunts and insults.
We both know each other's birth, each other's parents,
we've heard their far-flung fame on the lips of mortal men,
though you have never set eyes on mine, or I on yours.
They say you are Peleus' son, that fine, flawless man;
your mother, Thetis, sleek-haired child of the Sea.
And I am Aeneas, and I can boast Anchises' blood,
the proud Anchises, but my mother is Aphrodite.
Our parents—one pair or the other will mourn
a dear son today. Certain it is, I warn you,
we won't break off from battle and leave the field
with no more than a youngster's banter light as this.
But about my birth, if you'd like to learn it well,
first to last—though many people know it—
here's my story, Achilles . . .
Starting with Dardanus, Storm-king Zeus's son
who founded Dardania, long before holy Troy arose,
that city reared on the plain to shelter all our people.
They still camped on the slopes of Ida wet with springs.
Then Dardanus had a son in turn, King Erichthonius,
and he was the richest man in all the world—
three thousand mares he owned, grazing the marshes,
brood-mares in their prime, proud of their leaping foals.
And the North Wind, lusting once for the herd at pasture,
taking on the build of a black stallion, mounted several
and swelling under his force they bore him twelve colts.
And when they'd frisk on the tilled fields ripe with grain
they'd brush the crests of the corn and never snap a stalk,
but when they'd frisk and vault on the sea's broad back
they'd skim the crests of whitecaps glistening foam.
Now Erichthonius sired Tros, a lord of the Trojans,
and Tros, in turn, had three distinguished sons:
Ilus, Assaracus and Ganymede radiant as a god,
and he was the handsomest mortal man on earth—
and so the immortals, awestruck by his beauty,
snatched him away to bear the cup of Zeus
and pour out wine for all the deathless gods.
And Ilus, in turn, sired a valiant son Laomedon,
Laomedon had his sons as well, Tithonus and Priam,
Lampus and Clytius, Hicetaon the gallant aide of Ares.
and Assaracus fathered Capys, and he had a son Anchises
and Anchises fathered me, but Priam had Prince Hector.
There you have my lineage.
That is the blood I claim, my royal birth.
As for strength in war, Zeus lends power to some,
others he wastes away, whatever his pleasure—
the strongest god of all.
Come, Achilles,
no more bragging on this way like boys,
standing here in the thick of a pitched battle.
Plenty of insults we could fling against each other,
enough to sink a ship with a hundred benches!
A man's tongue is a glib and twisty thing . . .
plenty of words there are, all kinds at its command—
with all the room in the world for talk to range and stray.
And the sort you use is just the sort you'll hear.
What do we need with wrangling, hurling insults?
Cursing each other here like a pair of nagging women
boiling over with petty, heartsick squabbles, blustering
into the streets to pelt themselves with slander,
much of it true, much not. Anger stirs up lies.
I blaze for battle—your taunts can't turn me back,
not till we've fought it out with bronze. On with it—
taste the bite of each other's brazen spears!"
With that
he hurled a heavy lance at the great and awesome shield
and its massive surface clanged as it took the point.
Achilles had thrust it forth with his strong fist,
fearing staunch Aeneas' spear with its long shadow
would drive its whole length lightly through his buckler—
groundless fears. The fighter had no idea at all
that famous gifts of the gods do not break lightly,
can't be crushed when a mortal hand assails them.
So now not even seasoned Aeneas' heavy shaft
could smash Achilles' shield:
the gold blocked it, forged in the god's gift.
It did bore through two plies but three were left,
since the crippled Smith had made it five plies thick
with two of bronze on the outside, inside two of tin,
between them one of gold where the ashen spear held fast.
Achilles next—he hurled his spear and its long shadow flew
and the weapon struck the balanced round shield of Aeneas
under the outer rim where the bronze ran thinnest,
backed by the thinnest bull's-hide. Straight through
the Pelian ash burst, the shield rang out with a screech—
but Aeneas crouched low, holding the buckler off his chest,
terrified as the shaft shot past his back, hurled so hard
it plunged deep in the ground, even after it tore up
two round plies of the shield that cased his body.
Dodging the big spear, Aeneas got to his feet . . .
a dizzying swirl of anguish rushing down his eyes,
blind with fear, the point had stuck so close.
But drawing his sharp sword, Achilles charged, wild,
hurtling toward him, loosing a savage cry as Aeneas
hefted a boulder in his hands, a tremendous feat—
no two men could hoist it, weak as men are now,
but all on his own he raised it high with ease.
Then and there he'd have struck Achilles lunging in,
the rock would have hit him square in casque or shield,
the gear would have warded off grim death, and Achilles, closing,
would have slashed his life away with a well-honed blade—
if the god of earthquakes had not marked it quickly
and called the gods at once who grouped around him:
"Now, I tell you, my heart aches for great Aeneas!
He'll go down to the House of Death this instant,
overwhelmed by Achilles—all because he trusted
the distant deadly Archer's urgings. Poor fool—
as if Apollo would lift a hand to save him now
from death, grim death. Aeneas the innocent!
Why should Aeneas suffer here, for no good reason,
embroiled in the quarrels of others, not his own?
He always gave us gifts to warm our hearts,
gifts for the gods who rule the vaulting skies.
So come, let us rescue him from death ourselves,
for fear the son of Cronus might just tower in rage
if Achilles kills this man. He is destined to survive.
Yes, so the generation of Dardanus will not perish,
obliterated without an heir, without a trace:
Dardanus, dearest to Zeus of all the sons
that mortal women brought to birth for Father.
Now he has come to hate the generation of Priam,
and now Aeneas will rule the men of Troy in power—
his sons' sons and the sons born in future years."
But Hera the Queen broke in, her eyes open wide:
"Decide in your own mind, god of the earthquake,
whether to save Aeneas now or let him die,
crushed by Achilles, for all his fighting heart.
But time and again we two have sworn our oaths
in the eyes of all the gods—I and Pallas Athena—
never to drive the fatal day away from the Trojans,
not even when all Troy bums in the ramping flames
when the warring sons of Achaea burn her down!"
As soon as he heard that, the god of earthquakes
surged through the clashing troops and raining spears
to reach the place where the two famed heroes fought.
Quickly he poured a mist across Achilles' eyes,
wrenched the spear from stalwart Aeneas' shield,
laid the bronze-shod ashen shaft at Achilles' feet
and hoisting Aeneas off the earth he slung him far . . .
And over the massing lines of men and massing chariots,
high in the air Aeneas vaulted, hurled by the god's hand
till he came to ground at the battle's churning flank
where Cauconian units braced themselves for action.
The god of the earthquake swept beside him there
and gave the man a burst of winging orders: "Aeneas—
what god on high commands you to play the madman?
Fighting against. Achilles' overwhelming fury!—
both a better soldier and more loved by the gods.
Pull back at once, whenever you're thrown against him—
or go down to the House of Death against the will of fate.
But once Achilles has met his death, his certain doom,
take courage then, go fight on the front lines then—
no other Achaean can bring you down in war."
With that,
with destiny made clear, he left him there on the spot
and turning back to Achilles quickly brushed away
the mist from his eyes, the magic, godsent haze.
And Achilles stared with all his might, dazzled,
disgusted too, and addressed his own great heart:
"Impossible—look, a marvel right before my eyes!
That spear I hurled is lying here on the ground.
That man—I cannot see him-—
the one I hurled at, wild to cut him down.
Ah, so the deathless gods must love Aeneas too.
And I thought his vaunts were empty, hollow boasting. _
Well let him go, I say! Never, never again
will he have the nerve to test my fighting power—
even now he was glad to save himself from death.
Now, quick, I'll marshal our battle-hungry Argives—
face the rest of the Trojans, test them, fight them down!"
And back to the lines he leapt and urged each man,
"No more standing back from the Trojans, brave Achaeans!
Now fighter go against fighter, out for bloodshed!
It's hard for me, strong as I am, single-handed
to make for such a force and fight them all.
Why, not even Ares the deathless god of war,
not even Athena—for all their heavy labor—
could hack a passage through such jaws of battle.
But I—whatever fists and feet and strength can do,
that I will do, I swear, not hang back, not one inch.
Straight through enemy columns I go plowing now—
and no Trojan, I guarantee, will thrill with pleasure
once he meets my spearshaft head-to-head!"
Spurring his men
while Hector aflash in armor urged his Trojans—
thinking he'd even go up against Achilles:.
"No fear of Pelides now, my gallant Trojans!
I too could battle the deathless gods with words—
it's hard with a spear, the gods are so much stronger.
Not even Achilles can bring off all his boasts:
some he'll accomplish, some cut short, half done.
I'm off to engage the man, though his fists are fire,
though his fists are fire and his fury burnished iron!"
Spurring them on to raise their spears for full assault
and the Trojans' fury massed and mounted, war cries broke
but Apollo suddenly stood by Hector, shouting,
"Don't for a moment duel Achilles, Hector,
out in front of your ranks!
Withdraw to your main lines and wait him there,
out of the crash of battle. Else he'll spear you down
or close for the kill and hack you with his sword."
So Hector drew back to his thronging comrades,
terrified to hear the voice of god. Not Achilles—
armored in battle-power down he flung on the Trojans,
loosed barbaric cries, and his first kill was Iphition,
Otrynteus' hardy son and a chief of large contingents,
born of a river nymph to Otrynteus, scourge of towns,
below Tmolus' snows in the wealthy realm of Hyde . . .
As the Trojan charged head-on Achilles speared him
square in the brows—his whole skull split in half
and down he crashed, Achilles exulting over him:
"Here you lie, Otrynteus' son-most terrible man alive!
Here's your deathbed! Far from your birthplace, Gyge Lake
where your father's fine estate lies next to the Hyllus
stocked with fish and next to the whirling Hermus!"
Vaunting over the dark that swept his quarry's eyes
and the running-rims of Argive war-cars cut him to shreds
at the onset's breaking edge. And next Achilles lunged
at Demoleon, son of Antenor, a tough defensive fighter—
he stabbed his temple and cleft his helmet's cheekpiece.
None of the bronze plate could hold it-boring through
the metal and skull the bronze spearpoint pounded,
Demoleon's brains splattered all inside his casque,
the Trojan beaten down in his fury. Hippodamas next,
he leapt from his chariot fleeing before Achilles—
Achilles' spearshaft rammed him through the back
and he gasped his life away, bellowing like some bull
that chokes and grunts when the young boys drag him round
the lord of Helice's shrine and the earthquake god
delights to see them dragging—so he bellowed now
and the man's proud spirit left his bones behind.
Achilles rushed with his spear at noble Polydorus
son of Priam. His father would not let him fight,
ever, he was the youngest-bom of all his sons—
Priam loved him most, the fastest runner of all
but now the young fool, mad to display his speed,
went dashing along the front to meet his death.
Just as he shot past the matchless runner Achilles
speared him square in the back where his war-belt clasped,
golden buckles clinching both halves of his breastplate—
straight on through went the point and out the navel,
down on his knees he dropped-—
screaming shrill as the world went black before him—
clutched his bowels to his body, hunched and sank.
But Hector seeing his own brother Polydorus
clutching his entrails, sinking limp to the ground—
the mist came swirling down his eyes as well . . .
He could bear no more, wheeling off at a distance—
shaking his whetted spear he charged Achilles now,
coming fierce as fire but Achilles marked him quickly
and springing forth to take him, triumphed to himself,
"Here is the man who's raked my heart the most,
who killed my cherished comrade! No more delay,
dodging each other down the passageways of battle!"
Under his brows he glared at royal Hector, shouting,
"Quick, charge me—the sooner to meet your death!"
But Hector, his helmet flashing, never flinched:
"Don't think for a moment, Achilles, son of Peleus,
you can frighten me with words like a child, a fool—
I'm an old hand myself at trading taunts and insults.
Well I know you are brave, and I am far weaker.
True-but all lies in the lap of the great gods.
Weaker I am, but I still might take your life
with one hurl of a spear—my weapon can cut too,
long before now its point has found its mark!"
Grim reminder—
he brandished the shaft and hurled with all his might
but Athena blew it back from Achilles bent on glory—
a quick light breath and the shaft flew back again
to tall Prince Hector and fell before his feet.
Achilles blazed, charging, raging to cut him down,
loosing savage cries—but Phoebus whisked him away,
easy work for a god, and wrapped him round in mist.
Three times the brilliant runner Achilles charged him,
lunged with his bronze spear, three times he slashed at cloud—
then at Achilles' fourth assault like something superhuman
his terrifying voice burst out in winging words:
"Now, again, you've escaped your death, you dog,
but a good close brush with death it was, I'd sayl
Now, again, your Phoebus Apollo pulls you through,
the one you pray to, wading into our storm of spears.
We'll fight again—I'll finish you off next time
if one of the gods will only urge me on as well.
But now I'll go for the others, anyone I can catch."
Whirling
he stabbed Dryops, speared him right through the neck—
he dropped at his feet and Achilles left him dead
and smashed Demuchus' knee, Philetor's strapping son,
stopped him, right in his tracks with a well-flung spear
then sprang with his great sword and ripped his life away.
Then on he rushed at the sons of Bias—Laogonus, Dardanus—
hurled them off their chariot, slammed them both to ground,
one with a spear-thrust, one chopped down with a blade.
Then Tros, Alastor's son, crawled to Achilles' knees
and clutched them, hoping he'd spare him,
let Tros off alive, no cutting him down in blood,
he'd pity Tros, a man of his own age—the young fool,
he'd no idea, thinking Achilles could be swayed!
Here was a man not sweet at heart, not kind, no,
he was raging, wild—as Tros grasped his knees,
desperate, begging, Achilles slit open his liver,
the liver spurted loose, gushing with dark blood,
drenched his lap and the night swirled down his eyes
as his life breath slipped away.
And Mulius next—
he reared and jammed his lance through the man's ear
so the lance came jutting out through the other ear,
bronze point glinting.
Echeclus son of Agenor next—
Achilles split his head at the brow with hilted sword
so the whole blade ran hot with blood, and red death
came plunging down his eyes, and the strong force of fate.
Deucalion next—he lanced his arm with a bronze-shod spear,
he spitted the Trojan through where the elbow-tendons grip
and there he stood, waiting Achilles, arm dangling heavy,
staring death in the face—and Achilles chopped his neck
and his sword sent head and helmet flying off together
and marrow bubbling up from the clean-cut neckbone.
Down he went, his corpse full length on the ground—
just as Achilles charged at Piras' handsome son,
Rhigmus who'd sailed from the fertile soil of Thrace—
Achilles pierced his belly, the bronze impaled his guts
and out of his car he pitched as his driver Areithous
swung the horses round but Achilles speared his back
and the spearshaft heaved him off the chariot too
and the panicked stallions bolted.
Achilles now
like inhuman fire raging on through the mountain gorges
splinter-dry, setting ablaze big stands of timber,
the wind swirling the huge fireball left and right—
chaos of fire—Achilles storming on with brandished spear
like a frenzied god of battle trampling all he killed
and the earth ran black with blood. Thundering on,
on like oxen broad in the brow some field hand yokes
to crush white barley heaped on a well-laid threshing floor
and the grain is husked out fast by the bellowing oxen's hoofs—
so as the great Achilles rampaged on, his sharp-hoofed stallions
trampled shields and corpses, axle under his chariot splashed
with blood, blood on the handrails sweeping round the car,
sprays of blood shooting up from the stallions' hoofs
and churning, whirling rims—and the son of Peleus
charioteering on to seize his glory, bloody filth
splattering both strong arms, Achilles' invincible arms—
But once they reached the ford where the river runs clear,
the strong, whirling Xanthus sprung of immortal Zeus,
Achilles split the Trojan rout, driving one half
back toward the city, scattering up the plain
where Achaeans themselves stampeded off in terror
just the day before when Hector raged unchecked.
Now back in their tracks the Trojans fled pell-mell
while Hera spread dense cloud ahead to block their way.
But the other half were packed in the silver-whirling river,
into its foaming depths they tumbled, splashing, flailing—
the plunging river roaring, banks echoing, roaring back
and the men screamed, swimming wildly, left and right,
spinning round in the whirlpools. Spun like locusts
swarming up in the air, whipped by rushing fire,
flitting toward a river—the tireless fire blazes,
scorching them all with hard explosive blasts of flame
and beaten down in the depths the floating locusts huddle—
so at Achilles' charge the Xanthus' swirling currents
choked with a spate of horse and men—the river roared.
And the god-sprung hero left his spear on the bank,
propped on tamarisks-in he leapt like a frenzied god,
his heart racing with slaughter, only his sword in hand,
whirling in circles, slashing-hideous groans breaking,
fighters stabbed by the blade, water flushed with blood.
Like shoals of fish darting before some big-bellied dolphin,
escaping, cramming the coves of a good deepwater harbor,
terrified for their lives—he devours all he catches—
so the Trojans down that terrible river's onrush
cowered under its bluffs. But soon as Achilles
grew arm-weary from killing, twelve young Trojans
he rounded up from the river, took them all alive
as the blood-price for Patroclus' death, Menoetius' son.
He dragged them up on the banks, dazed like fawns,
lashed their hands behind them with well-cut straps—
their own belts that cinched their billowing war-shirts—
gave them to friends to lead away to the beaked ships
and back he whirled, insane to hack more flesh.
And first he met a son of Dardan Priam
just escaping the rapids—Lycaon, the very man
Achilles seized himself, once on a midnight raid,
and hauled from his father's orchard, resisting all the way.
He was pruning a young fig with his sharp bronze hook,
cutting green branches to bend for chariot-rails
when a sudden blow came down on him in the dark—
the grim marauder Achilles. That was the time
he shipped him to Lemnos fortress, sold him off
and the son of Jason paid the price for the slave,
but a stranger there released him from his chains,
Eetion out of Imbros paid a princely ransom
and sent him off to Arisbe's shining walls.so
From there he slipped away to his father's house,
struggling home from Lemnos, but only eleven days
he cheered his heart with friends. Then on the twelfth
some god cast him into Achilles' hands again
and now he would send him off on a new journey,
resisting all the way to the House of Death.
The swift runner recognized him at once
disarmed, no shield, no helmet, no spear left,
he'd scattered all his gear on the bank, sweating,
clambering out of the ford exhausted, knees buckling . . .
Achilles, filled with rage, addressed his own great heart:
"By heaven, an awesome miracle right before my eyes!
These gallant, die-hard Trojans, even those I've killed,
they'll all come rising back from the western gloom!
Look at this fellow here, back he comes again,
fleeing his fatal day—
and I'd sold him off as a slave in holy Lemnos
but the heaving gray salt sea can't hold him back,
though it stops whole fleets of men who buck its tides.
Let's try again—this time he'll taste my spearpoint.
Now we'll see, once and for all we'll know
if he returns as fast from his newest destination—
or the firm life-giving earth can hold him down,
the grave that hugs the strongest man alive."
Waiting,
plotting, the other stumbling toward him, stunned,
wild to grasp his knees, wild with all his heart
to escape his death and grueling black fate
as the great Achilles raised his massive spear,
wild to run him through—
He ducked, ran under the hurl
and seized Achilles' knees as the spear shot past his back
and stuck in the earth, still starved for human flesh.
And begging now, one hand clutching Achilles' knees,
the other gripping the spear, holding for dear life,
Lycaon burst out with a winging prayer: "Achilles!
I hug your knees—mercy!—spare my life!
I am your suppliant, Prince, you must respect me!
Yours was the first bread I broke, Demeter's gift,
that day you seized me in Priam's well-fenced orchard,
hauled me away from father, loved ones, sold me off
in holy Lemnos and I, I fetched you a hundred bulls—
and once released I brought three times that price.
And it's just twelve days that I've been home in Troy—
all I've suffered! But now, again, some murderous fate
has placed me in your hands, your prisoner twice over—
Father Zeus must hate me, giving me back to you!
Ah, to a short life you bore me, mother-mother,
she was Laothoe, aged Altes' daughter . . .
Altes who rules the Leleges always keen for war,
who holds the Pedasus heights along the Satniois—
and Priam wed his daughter, with many other wives,too
and she produced two sons, and you, you'll butcher both!
One you killed in the ranks of frontline fighters,
noble Polydorus, ran him down with your lance
and a gruesome death awaits me here and now—
no hope of escape for me, from your clutches,
not when destiny drives me up against you.
Listen, this too-take it to heart, I beg you—
don't kill me! I'm not from the same womb as Hector,
Hector who killed your friend, your strong, gentle friend!"
So the illustrious son of Priam begged for life
but only heard a merciless voice in answer: "Fool,
don't talk to me of ransom. No more speeches.
Before Patroclus met his day of destiny, true,
it warmed my heart a bit to spare some Trojans:
droves I took alive and auctioned off as slaves.
But now not a single Trojan flees his death,
not one the gods hand over to me before your gates,
none of all the Trojans, sons of Priam least of all!
Come, friend, you too must die. Why moan about it so?
Even Patroclus died, a far, far better man than you.
And look, you see how handsome and powerful I am?
The son of a great man, the mother who gave me life
a deathless goddess. But even for me, I tell you,
death and the strong force of fate are waiting.
There will come a dawn or sunset or high noon
when a man will take my life in battle too—
flinging a spear perhaps
or whipping a deadly arrow off his bow."
At that
Lycaon's knees gave way on the spot, his heart too.
He let go of the spear, he sank back down . . .
spreading both arms wide. Drawing his sharp sword
Achilles struck his collarbone just beside the neck
and the two-edged blade drove home, plunging to the hilt—
and down on the ground he sprawled, stretched facefirst
and dark blood pouring out of him drenched the earth.
Achilles grabbed a foot, slung him into the river,
washed away downstream as he cried above him
savage words to wing him on his way: "There—
lie there! Make your bed with the fishes now,
they'll dress your wound and lick it clean of blood—
so much for your last rites! Nor will your mother
lay your corpse on a bier and mourn her darling son—
whirling Scamander will roll you down the sea's broad bosom!
And many a fish, leaping up through the waves, breaking
the cold ripples shivering dark will dart and bolt
Lycaon's glistening fat! Die, Trojans, die—
till I butcher all the way to sacred Troy—
run headlong on, I'll hack you from behind!
Nothing can save you now—
not even your silver-whirling, mighty-tiding river—
not for all the bulls you've slaughtered to it for years,
the rearing stallions drowned alive in its eddies . . . die!—
even so—writhing in death till all you Trojans pay
for Patroclus' blood and the carnage of Achaeans
killed by the racing ships when I was out of action!"
The more he vaunted the more the river's anger rose,
churning at heart for a way to halt his rampage,
godlike Achilles, and stop the Trojans' rout.
But now Pelides shaking his long-shadowed spear
was charging Asteropaeus, mad to cut him down—
Pelegon's son, himself a son of the Axius River
broad and fast and Acessamenus' eldest daughter,
Periboea, loved by the deep-swirling stream.
Achilles went for Asteropaeus fresh from the ford,
braced to face him there and brandishing two spears
and the Xanthus filled the Trojan's heart with courage,
the river seething for all the youths Achilles slaughtered,
chopped to bits in its tide without a twinge of pity.
Closing against each other, just about in range,
the magnificent runner Achilles opened up,  170
"Who on earth are you? Where do you hail from?—
you with the gall to go against my onslaught.
Pity the ones whose sons stand up to me in war!"
But the noble son of Pelegon answered firmly,
"High-hearted son of Peleus, why ask about my birth?
I hail from Paeonia's rich soil, a far cry from here,
heading Paeonian troops with their long spears,
and this my eleventh day since raising Troy.
My birth? I come from the Axius' broad currents—
Axius floods the land with the clearest stream on earth
and Axius fathered the famous Spearman Pelegon.
Men say I am his son.
Now on with it, great Pelides, let us fight!"
Menacing so
as brilliant Achilles raised the Pelian ash spear
but the fighting Asteropaeus, quick, ambidextrous,
hurled both spears at once—one shaft hit the shield,
no breakthrough, the shaft could not smash through,
the gold blocked it, forged in the god's gift.
But the other grazed Achilles' strong right arm
and dark blood gushed as the spear shot past his back,
stabbing the earth hard, still lusting to sink in flesh . . .
But next Achilles, burning to cut down Asteropaeus
hurled his ashen shaft—it flew straight as a die
but a clean miss—it struck the river's high bank
and half the length of the lance stuck deep in soil.
So Achilles, drawing the sharp sword at his hip,
sprang at the man in rage as he tried to wrench
Pelides' spear from the bank but his grip failed.
Three times he tried to wrench it free, tugging madly,
thrice gave up the struggle—the fourth with all his might
he fought to bend Aeacides' shaft and break it off
but before it budged the hero was all over him,
slashing out his life, slitting his belly open—
a scooping slice at the navel and all his bowels
spilled out on the ground, darkness swirled his eyes
as he gasped his breath away. And trampling his chest
Achilles tore his gear off, glorying over him now:
"Lie there with the dead! Punishing work, you see,
to fight the sons of invincible Cronus' son,
even sprung from a river as you are! You- 210
you claimed your birth from a river's broad stream?
Well I can boast my birth from powerful Zeus himselfl
My father's the man who rules the hordes of Myrmidons,
Peleus, son of Aeacus, and Aeacus sprang from Zeus
and as Zeus is stronger than rivers surging out to sea,
so the breed of Zeus is stronger than any stream's.
Here is a great river flowing past you, look—
what help can he give you? Nonel
Nothing can fight the son of Cronus, Zeus,
not even Achelous king of rivers vies with Zeus,
not even the overpowering Ocean's huge high tides,
the source of all the rivers and all the seas on earth
and all springs and all deep wells—all flow from the ocean
but even the Ocean shrinks from the mighty Father's bolt
when terrible thunder crashes down the skies!"
With that
Achilles pulled his bronze spear from the river bluff
and left him there, the Trojan's life slashed out,
sprawled in the sand, drenched by the black tide—
eels and fish the corpse's frenzied attendants
ripping into him, nibbling kidney-fat away.
But Achilles went for Paeonians, helmets plumed,
still running in panic along the river's rapids
once they saw their finest fall in the onslaught,
beaten down by Pelides' hands and hacking sword.
He killed in a blur of kills—Thersilochus, Mydon,
Astypylus, Mnesus, Thrasius, Aenius and Ophelestes—
still more Paeonian men the runner would have killed
if the swirling river had not risen, crying out in fury,
taking a man's shape, its voice breaking out of a whirlpool:
"Stop, Achilles! Greater than any man on earth,
greater in outrage too—
for the gods themselves are always at your side!
But if Zeus allows you to kill off all the Trojans,
drive them out of my depths at least, I ask you,
out on the plain and do your butchery there.
All my lovely rapids are crammed with corpses now,
no channel in sight to sweep my currents out to sacred sea—
I'm choked with corpses and still you slaughter more,
you blot out more! Leave me alone, have done—
captain of armies, I am filled with horror!"
And the breakneck runner only paused to answer,
"So be it, Scamander sprung of Zeus—as you command.
But I, I won't stop killing these overweening Trojans,
not till I've packed them in their walls and tested Hector,
strength against strength—he kills me or I kill him!"
Down on the Trojan front he swept like something superhuman
and now from his deep whirls the river roared to Phoebus,
"Disgrace—god of the silver bow and bom of Zeusl
You throw to the winds the will of Cronus' son—
time and again Zeus gave you strict commands:
Stand by the Trojan ranks and save their lives
till the sun goes down at last and darkness shrouds
the plowlands ripe with grain!"
When he heard that
Achilles the famous Spearman, leaping down from the bluff,
plunged in the river's heart and the river charged against him,
churning, surging, all his rapids rising in white fury
and drove the mass of corpses choking tight his channel,
the ruck Achilles killed-Scamander heaved them up
and bellowing like a bull the river flung them out
on the dry land but saved the living, hiding them down
the fresh clear pools of his thundering whirling current
but thrashing over Achilles' shoulders raised a killer-wave—
the tremendous thrust of it slammed against his shield
and he staggered, lost his footing, his arms flung out
for a tall strong elm, he clung but out it came by the roots,
toppling down, ripping away the whole cliff, blocking the stream
with a tangled snarl of branches crashing into it full length
to dam the river bank to bank-Bursting up from a whirlpool
Achilles dashed for the plain, his feet flying in terror
but the great god would not let up, hurling against him,
Scamander looming into a murderous breaker, dark, over him,
dead set on stopping the brilliant Achilles' rampage here
and thrusting disaster off the struggling Trojan force—
But the hero sprang away, far as a hard-flung spear,
swooping fast as the black eagle, the fierce marauder,
both the strongest and swiftest bird that flies the sky—
on he streaked and the bronze rang out against his chest,
clashing grimly—slipping out from under the wave he fled
with the river rolling on behind him, roaring, huge . . .
As a farmhand runs a ditch from a dark spring, sluicing
the gushing stream through plants and gardens, swinging
his mattock to knock the clods out down the shoot
and the water rushes on, tearing the pebbles loose
and what began as a trickle hits a quick slope and
down it goes, outstripping the man who guides it—
so the relentless tide kept overtaking Achilles,
yes, for all his speed—gods are stronger than men.
Again and again the brilliant swift Achilles whirled,
trying to stand and fight the river man-to-man and see
if all the immortal gods who rule the vaulting skies
were after him, putting him to rout-again and again
the mighty crest of the river fed by the rains of Zeus
came battering down his shoulders, down from high above
bi it Achilles kept on leaping, higher, desperate now
as the river kept on dragging down his knees, lunging
under him, cutting the ground from under hic legs . . .
Pelides groaned, scanning the arching blank sky:
"Father Zeus! To think in all my misery not one god
can bring himself to rescue me from this river!
Then I'd face any fate. And no god on high,
none is to blame so much as my dear mother—
how she lied, she beguiled me, she promised me
I'd die beneath the walls of the armored Trojans,
cut down in blood by Apollo's whipping arrows!
I wish Hector had killed me,
the best man bred in Troy-the killer a hero then
and a hero too the man whose corpse he stripped!
Now look what a wretched death I'm doomed to suffer,
trapped in this monstrous river like some boy, some pig-boy
swept away, trying to ford a winter torrent in a storm!"
Quick to his cry Poseidon and Pallas moved in close,
stood at his shoulder now and taking human form,
grasped him hand-to-hand, spoke bracing words,
Poseidon who shakes the mainland first to say,
"Courage, Achilles! Why such fear, such terror?
Not with a pair like us to urge you on-gods-in-arms
sent down with Zeus's blessings, I and Pallas Athena.
It's not your fate to, be swallowed by a river:
he'll subside, and soon—you'll see for yourself.
But we do have sound advice, if only you will yield.
Never rest your hands from the great leveler war,
not till you pack and cram the Trojan armies tight
in the famous walls of Troy—whoever flees your onset.
But once you've ripped away Prince Hector's life,
back to the ships you go! We give you glory—
seize it in your hands!"
With that challenge
both went soaring home to the deathless ones on high
but Achilles rampaged on with the gods' strong command
driving him down the plain where the river flooded now,
an immense, cresting outrush bursting with burnished gear
and troops of battle dead, men cut down in their prime,
floating corpses rolling-But Achilles surged on too
with high hurdling strides, charging against the river,
on, breakneck on and the river could not stop him,
not for all its reach and tide race, not with Athena
pumping enormous strength deep down Achilles' heart—
But the Xanthus River would not slack his fury .either,
he raged at Achilles all the more, he marshaled up
a mountainous ridge of water, roaring out to Simois,
"Oh dear brother, rise! Both of us rush together
to halt this mortal's onslaught! At any moment
he'll storm King Priam's mighty stronghold down—
the Trojans can't stand up to the man in battle.
Beat him back, quickly! Deluge all your channels
from all your gushing springs-muster all your torrents—
raise up a tremendous wave, rumbling, booming with timber,
boulders crashing—we'll stop this wild man in his tracks,
lording it in his power now and raging like some god!
Neither his strength nor splendid build can save him,
not now, I tell you—nor all that glorious armor:
now, somewhere under our floods that gear will sink,
immersed deep in slime, and I, I'll roil his body
round in sand and gravel, tons of spills of silt.
Achaeans will never know where to find his bones,
never collect them now—
I'll bury that man so deep in mud and rocks!
That's where his grave-mound will be piled and then
no need in the world to raise his barrow high
when comrades come to give him royal rites!"
So he vaunted,
rearing against Achilles, seething, heaving up in fury, 
thundering out now in foam and blood and corpses—
the bloodred crest of the river swelled by Zeus
came arching higher, ready to tear Pelides down
but Hera, struck with fear for Achilles, screamed out,
dreading he might be swept away by the giant churning river
and quickly cried to the god of fire, her own dear son,
"To arms, my child—god of the crooked legs!
You are the one we'd thought a worthy match
for the whirling river Xanthus!
Quick, rescue Achilles! Explode in a burst of fire!
I'll drive the West and South Winds white with clouds
and sweep in from the open seas a tearing gale to sear
the Trojan bodies and gear and spread your lethal flames!
And you, you make for the Xanthus banks and burn the trees,
hurl the stream itself into conflagration—not for a moment
let him turn you back with his winning words or threats.
Never abate your fury! Not till I let loose my shout—
then halt your withering fire!"
Hera's command—
and Hephaestus launched his grim inhuman blaze.
First he shot into flames and burned the plain,
ignited hordes of corpses, squads Achilles slaughtered—
he scorched the whole plain and the shining river shrank.
Hard as the autumn North Wind hits a leveled field
just drenched in a downpour, quickly dries it off
and the fanner is glad and starts to till his soil—
so the whole plain was parched and the god of fire devoured
all the dead, then blazing in all his glory veered for the river—
an inferno—the elms burned, the willows and tamarisks burned
and the lotus burned and the galingale and reeds and rushes,
all that flourished along the running river's lush banks 
and the eels writhed and fish in the whirlpools leapt high,
breaking the surface left and right in a sheen of fire,
gasping under the Master Smith Hephaestus' blast
and now the river's strength was burning out,
he panted the god's name: "Hephaestus—stop!
Not a single god can stand against you—no, not I—
can't fight such fire, such fury—hold your attack, stop!
Brilliant Achilles can drive them out of Ilium now!
What's this war to me? Why should I help Troy?"
He screamed in flames, his clear currents bubbling up
like a cauldron whipped by crackling fire as it melts down
the lard of a fat swine, splattering up around the rim—
dry lpSs blazing under it, lashing it to the boil—
so the river burned, his clear currents seethed
and lost all will to flow. He stopped—overwhelmed
by the torrid blast of the Master Craftsman god of fire—
and Xanthus cried to Hera, pouring out his heart
in a flood of supplication, "Oh Hera—why?
Why does your son attack me, whip my waters more
than all the others? Why, what have I done to you?
Nothing beside those other powers, all who rush
to defend the Trojan armies. Oh I'll stop—
if that is your command—
but let your son stop too! I'll swear, what's more,
never to drive the fatal day away from the Trojans,
not even when all Troy burns in the ramping flames
when the warring sons of Achaea bum her down!"
And Hera heard him, the radiant white-armed goddess
quickly cried to the god of fire, her own dear son,
"Hephaestus, stop! Stop, my glorious blazing boy!
It's not right to batter another deathless god,
not for the sake of these mortals."
She ceased
and the god of fire quenched his grim inhuman blaze
and back in its channel ran the river's glistening tides.
And now with the strength of Xanthus beaten down
the two called off their battle. Hera held them back,
still enraged as she was. But now for total war,
bearing down on the other gods, disastrous, massive,
their fighting-fury blasting loose from opposing camps—
the powers collided! A mammoth clash—the wide earth roared
and the arching vault of heaven echoed round with trumpets!
And Zeus heard the chaos, throned on Olympus heights,
and laughed deep in his own great heart, delighted
to see the gods engage' in all-out conflict.
They did not waste a moment, closed at once—
Ares stabber of shields led off, charging Athena,
shaking his brazen spear and dressed the goddess down:
"You dog-fly, why drive the gods to battle once again
with that stormy bluster driving your wild heart?
Don't you recall the time you drove Tydides' son
to spear me through? In the eyes of all the world
you seized his lance and rammed it home yourself,
tearing into my rippling, deathless flesh—so now
I think I'll pay you back for all your outrage!"
With that he stabbed at her battle-shield of storm,
its dark tassels flaring, packing tremendous force—
not even Zeus's lightning bolt can break its front.
Bloody Ares lunged at it now with giant lance
and Athena backed away, her powerful hand hefting
a boulder off the plain, black, jagged, a ton weight
that men in the old days planted there to mark off plowland—
Pallas hurled that boundary-stone at Ares, struck his neck,
loosed his limbs, and down he crashed and out over seven acres
sprawled the enormous god and his mane dragged in the dust,
his armor clashed around him. Athena laughed aloud,
glorying over him, winging insults: "Colossal fool—
it never even occurred to you, not even now
when you matched your strength with mine,
just how much greater I claim to be than you!
So now you feel the weight of your mother's curses—
Hera plotted against you, Hera up in arms
because you left the Achaean forces in the lurch
and rushed to defend these reckless, headlong Trojans!"
Triumphant Athena turned her shining eyes away
and Aphrodite daughter of Zeus took Ares' hand
and led him off the field, racked with groans,
barely able to gather back his strength ...
But the white-armed Hera saw her move at once
and winged Athena on: "Just look at them there—
daughter of Zeus whose shield is storm and thunder,
tireless one, Athena. There she goes again,
that dog-fly, leading her man-destroying Ares'clear
of the rampage, through the slaughter! After her, quick!"
Athena's heart leapt high, she charged at Aphrodite,
overtook her and beat her breasts with clenched fists.
Down she sank with Ares, resistance quite dissolved,
two immortals spread on the earth that rears us all
with Pallas trumpeting over them winged exultations:
"Down you go! May all the gods who help the Trojans
fall as hard when they battle Argives armed for war—
all as courageous, all as steadfast as Aphrodite
when she sped to Ares' side and faced my fury!
Then we'd have done with fighting long ago,
razed the rugged walls of Troy and laid her waste."
So Athena vaunted and white-armed Hera smiled
but the mighty god of earthquakes challenged Phoebus:
"Apollo—why hold back from each other? It's not fair
when the other gods have launched themselves in war.
What disgrace for us—to return without a fight
to the bronze-floored house of Zeus on Mount Olympus!
You lead off. You are the younger-born, and I—
it's wrong for me, since I have years on you
and I know the world much better.
Fool, what short-lived memory you must have!
Don't you remember? Have you forgotten-even now?—
all those troubles we suffered here alongside Troy,
we alone of the gods when Zeus dispatched us down
to slave for proud Laomedon one whole year,
for stated wages—at that man's beck and call.
I erected the rampart round the Trojans' city,  510
a massive ashlar wall to make the place impregnable.
You, Phoebus, herded his shambling crook-homed cattle
along the spurs of Ida's timbered ridges. Ah but then,
when the happy spring brought time for payment round,
that outrageous man Laomedon robbed us blind.
He stole our wages, cursed us, sent us packing—
he threatened to bind us both, hand and foot,
ship us off and away as slaves to distant islands—
he was all for lopping off our ears with a brazen ax!
So we made our way back home, hearts smoldering,
furious for the sum he swore but never paid—
and that, that is the one whose men you favor now.
No joining ranks with us as we fight to wipe them out,
these insolent Trojans, stretch them out in the dust
with all their sons and all their honored wives!"
But the distant deadly Archer volleyed back,
"God of the earthquake—you'd think me hardly sane
if I fought with you for the sake of wretched mortals . . .
like leaves, no sooner flourishing, full of the sun's fire,
feeding on earth's gifts, than they waste away and die.  
Stop. Call off this skirmish of ours at once—
let these mortals fight themselves to death."
With that he turned and left, filled with shame
to grapple his own father's brother hand-to-hand.
But his sister Artemis, Huntress, queen of beasts,
inveighed against him now with stinging insults:
"So, the deadly immortal Archer runs for dear life!—
turning over victory to Poseidon, total victory,
giving him all the glory here without a fight.
Why do you sport that bow, you spineless fool?—
it's worthless as the wind!
Don't let me hear you boast in Father's halls,
ever again, as you bra8Sed among the gods till now,
that you would fight Poseidon strength for strength."
but Zeus's regal consort flew into rage at once
and her outburst raked the Huntress armed with arrows:
"How do you have the gall, you shameless bitch,
to stand and fight me here? You and your archery!
Zeus made you a lion against all women, true,
he lets you kill off mothers in their labor—
but you'll find it painful, matching force with me.
Better to slaughter beasts on rocky mountain slopes
and young deer in the wild than fight a higher goddess!
But since you'd like a lesson in warfare, Artemis,
just to learn, to savor how much stronger I am
when you engage my power-"
She broke off,
her left hand seizing both wrists of the goddess,
right hand stripping the bow and quiver off her shoulders—
Hera boxed the Huntress' ears with her own weapons,
smiling broadly now as her victim writhed away
and showering arrows scattered. Bursting into tears
the goddess slipped from under her clutch like a wild dove
that flies from a hawk's attack to a hollow rocky cleft
for it's not the quarry's destiny to be caught—
so she fled in tears, her archery left on the spot.
But Hermes the guide of souls and giant-killer
reassured her mother, Leto, "Nothing to fear,
I'd never fight you, Leto. An uphill battle it is,
trading blows with the wives of Zeus who rules the clouds.
No, go boast to your heart's content and tell the gods
you triumphed over me with your superhuman power!"
So Leto gathered the reflex bow and arrows
scattered left and right in the swirling dust,
and bearing her daughter's archery in her arms
withdrew from the field of battle trailing Artemis.
By now the Huntress had reached Olympus heights
and made her way to the bronze-floored house of Zeus.
And down she sat on her Father's lap, a young girl,
sobbing, her deathless robe quivering round her body.
But her Father, son of Cronus, hugged her tight
and giving a low warm laugh inquired gently,
"Who has abused you now, dear child, tell me,
who of the sons of heaven so unfeeling, cruel?
Why, it's as if they had caught you in public,
doing something wrong . . . "
Wreathed in flowers
the one who halloos the hunt cried out at once,
"Your own wife, Father! The white-armed Hera beat me!
This strife, this warfare plaguing all the immortals—
Hera's all to blame!"
And now as the powers. wrangled back and forth
the lord god Apollo entered holy Troy,
filled with dread for the city's sturdy walls:
what if the Argive forces stormed them down today—
against the will of fate? The rest of the gods
who live forever soon returned to Mount Olympus,
some enraged, some in their proud, new-won glory,
and sat beside the Father, king of the black cloud.
But Achilles slaughtered on and on, never pausing,
killing Trojans and skittish battle-teams at once.
As smoke goes towering into the broad vaulting sky
from a burning town and the gods' wrath drives it on,
dealing struggle to all, to many searing grief—
so Achilles dealt the Trojans struggle, grief.
But there on the god-built heights stood aged Priam.
He saw the monstrous Achilles and racing on before him
Trojans whipped in headlong flight, all rescue gone.
The king cried out and clambered down to ground
from the high tower, issuing quick commands
to veteran gateway guards beside the walls:
"Spread the great gates wide—all hands now—
till our routed troops can straggle back to Troy!
Achilles swarms over them—they're stampeding,
a terrible mauling's coming . . . I can see it now!
Once they're packed in the walls and catch their breath,
close the thickset gates and bolt them tight again.
I dread this murderous man-he'll burst right through our walls."
They spread the gates and rammed the doorbars back
and the spreading gates made way for a ray of hope
as Phoebus Apollo hurtled forth to meet Achilles,
to fight disaster off the Trojan troops.
Heading straight for the city's lofty ramparts,
ragged with thirst, choked with dust from the plain
they fled as Achilles stormed them, shaking his spear,
that wild rabid frenzy always gripping his heart,
blazing to seize his glory.
And then and there
the Achaeans would have taken the lofty gates of Troy
if Apollo had not driven Prince Agenor at them,
Antenor's son, a courageous, rugged soldier.
He inspired his heart with daring, standing near—
in person, to beat away the dragging fates of death—
leaning against an oak, concealed in swirls of mist.
And now, as soon as Agenor saw Achilles coming,
there he stood, poised for the scourge of cities
while the heart inside him heaved like heavy seas.
Waiting, tense, he probed his own brave spirit:
"Ah dear god—if I run from Achilles' onslaught,
taking the route the rest have fled, stampeding,
he'll catch me even so and slash my coward's throat.
But if I leave my comrades panicked before his charge,
this Prince Achilles—slip away from the wall on foot
and race the other way, out to Ilium's plain and
reach the spurs of Ida, hide in the underbrush
and then, in the dying light . . .
once I've washed my sweat away in the river,
yes, I just might make it back again to Troy—
but why debate, my friend, why thrash things out?
God forbid that Achilles sees me turning tail,
heading from town and out to open country—
he'll come after me full tilt 'and run me downl
And then no way to escape my death, my certain doom—
Achilles is far too strong for any man on earth.
Wait . . . what if I face him out before the walls?
Surely his body can be pierced by bronze, even his—
he has only one life, and people say he's mortal:
it's only the son of Cronus handing him the glory."
Filled with resolve, he braced, waiting Achilles,
his warrior blood incensed. He'd fight to the death
as a panther springs forth from her thicket lair
to stand and face the huntsman: no fear in her heart,
no thought of flight when she hears the baying packs—
and even if he's too quick with spear or lunging sword,
even if she's run through, she never slacks her fury
until she's charged him hard or gone down fighting.
And so the noble son of Antenor, brave Agenor
would never run until he'd tested Achilles.
He steadied his balanced shield before his chest,
aimed his spear at the man and flung this challenge:
"Surely you must have hoped with all your heart—
the great glorious Achilles—that you would raze
the proud Trojans' city this very day! You fool—
you still have plenty of pain to suffer for her sake.
We have fighting men by the hundreds still inside her,
forming a wall before our loving parents, wives and sons
to defend Troy—where you rush on to meet your doom,
headlong man as you are, breakneck man of war!"
And he hurled his sharp spear from, a strong hand—
a hard true hit on Achilles' shin below the knee!
But the tin of the fire-new armor round his leg
let loose an unearthly ring—back the spear sprang
from the wondrous gear it struck, not punching through:
the gift of the god Hephaestus blocked its force.
Achilles next, he leapt at Prince Agenor—
but Phoebus refused to let him seize the glory—
he whisked Agenor off, wrapped in swirls of mist
and sped him out of the fighting safely on his way
and then with trickery kept Achilles off the Trojans.
True, just like Agenor head to foot the deadly Archer
stood in Achilles' path and Achilles sprang in chase,
feet racing, coursing him far across the wheat-fields,
heading him out toward Scamander's whirling depths
as the god led him a little, luring him on and on—
always hoping to catch the god with bursts of speed.
But all the while the rest of the Trojans fled en masse,
thrilled to reach the ramparts, crowding, swarming in,
no daring left to remain outside the city walls
and wait for each other, learn who made it through,
who died in battle-no, in a driving rout they came,
streaming into Troy,
any fighter whose racing legs could save his life.
So all through Troy the men who had fled tike panicked fawns
were wiping off their sweat, drinking away their thirst,
leaning along the city's massive ramparts now
while Achaean troops, sloping shields to shoulders,
closed against the walls. But there stood Hector,
shackled fast by his deadly fate, holding his ground,
exposed in front of Troy and the Scaean Gates.
And now Apollo turned to taunt Achilles:
"Why are you chasing me? Why waste your speed?—
son of Peleus, you a mortal and I a deathless god.
You still don't know that I am immortal, do you?—
straining to catch me in your fury! Have you forgotten?
There's a war to fight with the Trojans you stampeded,
look, they're packed inside their city walls,
but you, you've slipped away out here. You can't kill me—
I can never die-it's not my fate!"
Enraged at that,
Achilles shouted in mid-stride, "You've blocked my way,
you distant, deadly Archer, deadliest god of all—
you made me swerve away from the rampart there.
Else what a mighty Trojan army had gnawed the dust
before they could ever straggle through their gates!
Now you've robbed me of great glory, saved their lives
with all your deathless ease. Nothing for you to fear,
no punishment to come. Oh I'd pay you back
if I only had the power at my command!"
No more words—he dashed toward the city,
heart racing for some great exploit, rushing on
like a champion stallion drawing a chariot full tilt,
sweeping across the plain in easy, tearing strides—
so Achilles hurtled on, driving legs and knees.
And old King Priam was first to see him coming,
surging over the plain, blazing like the star
that rears at harvest, flaming up in its brilliance,—
far outshining the countless stars in the night sky,
that star they call Orion's Dog—brightest of all
but a fatal sign emblazoned on the heavens,
it brings such killing fever down on wretched men.
So the bronze flared on his chest as on he raced—
and the old man moaned, flinging both hands high,
beating his head and groaning deep he called,
begging his dear son who stood before the gates,
unshakable, furious to fight Achilles to the death.
The old man cried, pitifully, hands reaching out to him,
"Oh Hector! Don't just stand there, don't, dear child,
waiting that man's attack—alone, cut off from friends!
You'll meet your doom at once, beaten down by Achilles,
so much stronger than you—that hard, headlong man.
Oh if only the gods loved him as much as I do . . .
dogs and vultures would eat his fallen corpse at once!—
with what a load of misery lifted from my spirit.
That man who robbed me of many sons, brave boys,
cutting them down or selling them off as slaves,
shipped to islands half the world away . . .
ven now there are two, Lycaon and Polydorus—
I cannot find them among the soldiers crowding Troy,
those sons Laothoe bore me, Laothoe queen of women.
But if they are still alive in the enemy's camp,
then we'll ransom them back with bronze and gold.
We have hoards inside the walls, the rich dowry
old and famous Altes presented with his daughter.
But if they're dead already, gone to the House of Death,
what grief to their mother's heart and mine—we gave them life.
For the rest of Troy, though, just a moment's grief
unless you too are battered down by Achilles.
Back, come back! Inside the walls, my boy!
Rescue the men of Troy and the Trojan women—
don't hand the great glory to Peleus' son,
bereft of your own sweet life yourself.
Pity me too!—
still in my senses, true, but a harrowed, broken man
marked out by doom-past the threshold of old age . . .
and Father Zeus will waste me with a hideous fate,
and after I've lived to look on so much horror!
My sons laid low, my daughters dragged away
and the treasure-chambers looted, helpless babies
hurled to the earth in the red barbarity of war . . .
my sons' wives hauled off by the Argives' bloody hands!
And I, I last of all—the dogs before my doors
will eat me raw, once some enemy brings me down
with his sharp bronze sword or spits me with a spear,
wrenching the life out of my body, yes, the very dogs
I bred in my own halls to share my table, guard my gates—
mad, rabid at heart they'll lap their master's blood
and loll before my doors.
Ah for a young man
all looks fine and noble if he goes down in war,
hacked to pieces under a slashing bronze blade—
he lies there dead . . . but whatever death lays bare,
all wounds are marks of glory. When an old man's killed
and the dogs go at the gray head and the gray beard
and mutilate the genitals—that is the cruelest sight
in all our wretched lives!"
So the old man groaned
and seizing his gray hair tore it out by the roots
but he could not shake the fixed resolve of Hector.
And his mother wailed now, standing beside Priam,
weeping freely, loosing her robes with one hand
and holding out her bare breast with the other,
her words pouring forth in a flight of grief and tears:
"Hector, my child! Look—have some respect for this!
Pity your mother too, if I ever gave you the breast
to soothe your troubles, remember it now, dear boy—
beat back that savage man from safe inside the walls!
Don't go forth, a champion pitted against him—
merciless, brutal man. If he kills you now,
how can I ever mourn you on your deathbed?—
dear branch in bloom, dear child I brought to birth!—
Neither I nor your wife, that warm, generous woman . . .
Now far beyond our reach, now by the Argive ships
the rushing dogs will tear you, bolt your flesh!"
So they wept, the two of them crying out
to their dear son, both pleading time and again
but they could not shake the fixed resolve of Hector.
No, he waited Achilles, coming on, gigantic in power.
As a snake in the hills, guarding his hole, awaits a man—
bloated with poison, deadly hatred seething inside him,
glances flashing fire as he coils round his lair . . .
so Hector, nursing his quenchless fury, gave no ground,
leaning his burnished shield against a jutting wall,
but harried still, he probed his own brave heart:
"No way out. If I slip inside the gates and walls,
Polydamas will be first to heap disgrace on me—
he was the one who urged me to lead our Trojans
back to Ilium just last night, the disastrous night
Achilles rose in arms like a god. But did I give way?
Not at all. And how much better it would have been!
Now my army's ruined, thanks to my own reckless pride,
I would die of shame to face the men of Troy
and the Trojan women trailing their long robes . . .
Someone less of a man than I will say, 'Our Hector—
staking all on his own strength, he destroyed his army!'
So they will mutter. So now, better by far for me
to stand up to Achilles, kill him, come home alive
or die at his hands in glory out before the walls.
But wait—what if I put down my studded shield
and heavy helmet, prop my spear on the rampart
and go forth, just as I am, to meet Achilles,
noble Prince Achilles . . .
why, I could promise to give back Helen, yes,
and all her treasures with her, all those riches
Paris once hauled home to Troy in the hollow ships—
and they were the cause of all our endless fighting—
Yes, yes, return it all to the sons of Atreus now
to haul away, and then, at the same time, divide
the rest with all the Argives, all the city holds,
and then I'd take an oath for the Trojan royal council
that we will hide nothing! Share and share alike the hoards
our handsome citadel stores within its depths and—
Why debate, my friend? Why thrash things out?
I must not go and implore him. He'll show no mercy,
no respect for me, my rights-he'll cut me down
straight off—stripped of defenses like a woman
once I have loosed the armor off my body.
No way to parley with that man—not now—
not from behind some oak or rock to whisper,
like a boy and a young girl, lovers' secrets
a boy and girl might whisper to each other . . .
Better to clash in battle, now, at once—
see which fighter Zeus awards the glory!"
So he wavered,
waiting there, but Achilles was closing on him now
like the god of war, the fighter's helmet flashing,
over his right shoulder shaking the Pelian ash spear,
that terror, and the bronze around his body flared
like a raging fire or the rising, blazing sun.
Hector looked up, saw him, started to tremble,
nerve gone, he could hold his ground no longer,
he left the gates behind and away he fled in fear—
and Achilles went for him, fast, sure of his speed
as the wild mountain hawk, the quickest thing on wings,
launching smoothly, swooping down on a cringing dove
and the dove flits out from under, the hawk screaming
over the quarry, plunging over and over, his fury
driving him down to beak and tear his kill—
so Achilles flew at him, breakneck on in fury
with Hector fleeing along the walls of Troy,
fast as his legs would go. On and on they raced,
passing the lookout point, passing the wild fig tree
tossed by the wind, always out from under the ramparts
down the wagon trail they careered until they reached
the clear running springs where whirling Scamander
rises up from its double wellsprings bubbling strong—
and one runs hot and the steam goes up around it,
drifting thick as if fire burned at its core
but the other even in summer gushes cold
as hail or freezing snow or water chilled to ice . . .
And here, close to the springs, lie washing-pools
scooped out in the hollow rocks and broad and smooth
where the wives of Troy and all their lovely daughters
would wash their glistening robes in the old days,
the days of peace before the sons of Achaea came . . .
Past these they raced, one escaping, one in pursuit
and the one who fled was great but the one pursuing
greater, even greater—their pace mounting in speed
since both men strove, not for a sacrificial beast
or oxhide trophy, prizes runners fight for, no,
they raced for the life of Hector breaker of horses.
Like powerful stallions sweeping round the post for trophies,
galloping full stretch with some fine prize at stake,
a tripod, say, or woman offered up at funeral games
for some brave hero fallen—so the two of them
whirled three times around the city of Priam,
sprinting at top speed while all the gods gazed down,
and the father of men and gods broke forth among them now:
"Unbearable—a man I love, hunted round his own city walls
and right before my eyes. My heart grieves for Hector.
Hector who burned so many oxen in my honor, rich cuts,
now on the rugged crests of Ida, now on Ilium's heights.
But now, look, brilliant Achilles courses him round
the city of Priam in all his savage, lethal speed.
Come, you immortals, think this through. Decide.
Either we pluck the man from death and save his life
or strike him down at last, here at Achilles' hands—
for all his fighting heart."
But immortal Athena,
her gray eyes wide, protested strongly: "Father!
Lord of the lightning, king of the black cloud,
what are you saying? A man, a mere mortal,
his doom sealed long ago? You'd set him free
from all the pains of death?
Do as you please—
but none of the deathless gods will ever praise you."
And Zeus who marshals the thunderheads replied,
"Courage, Athena, third-born of the gods, dear child.
Nothing I said was meant in earnest, trust me,
I mean you all the good will in the world. Go.
Do as your own impulse bids you. Hold back no more."
So he launched Athena already poised for action—
down the goddess swept from Olympus' craggy peaks.
And swift Achilles kept on coursing Hector, nonstop
as a hound in the mountains starts a fawn from its lair,
hunting him down the gorges, down the narrow glens
and the fawn goes to ground, hiding deep in brush
but the hound comes racing fast, nosing him out
until he lands his kill. So Hector could never throw
Achilles off his trail, the swift racer Achilles—
time and again he'd make a dash for the Dardan Gates,
trying to rush beneath the rock-built ramparts, hoping
men on the heights might save him, somehow, raining spears
but time and again Achilles would intercept him quickly,
heading him off, forcing him out across the plain
and always sprinting along the city side himself—
endless as in a dream . . .
when a man can't catch another fleeing on ahead
and he can never escape nor his rival overtake him—
so the one could never run the other down in his speed
nor the other spring away. And how could Hector have fled
the fates of death so long? How unless one last time,
one final time Apollo had swept in close beside him,
driving strength in his legs and knees to race the wind?
And brilliant Achilles shook his head at the armies,
never letting them hurl their sharp spears at Hector—
someone might snatch the glory, Achilles come in second.
But once they reached the springs for the fourth time,
then Father Zeus held out his sacred golden scales:
in them he placed two fates of death that lays men low—
one for Achilles, one for Hector breaker of horses—
and gripping the beam mid-haft the Father raised it high
and down went Hector's day of doom, dragging him down
to the strong House of Death—and god Apollo left him.
Athena rushed to Achilles, her bright eyes gleaming,
standing shoulder-to-shoulder, winging orders now:
"At last our hopes run high, my brilliant Achilles—
Father Zeus must love you—
we'll sweep great glory back to Achaea's fleet,
we'll kill this Hector, mad as he is for battle!
No way for him to escape us now, no longer—
not even if Phoebus the distant deadly Archer
goes through torments, pleading for Hector's life,
groveling over and over before our storming Father Zeus.
But you, you hold your ground and catch your breath,
while I run Hector down and persuade the man
to fight you face-to-face."
So Athena commanded
and he obeyed, rejoicing at heart—Achilles stopped,
leaning against his ashen spearshaft barbed in bronze.
And Athena left him there, caught up with Hector at once,
and taking the build and vibrant voice of Deiphobus
stood shoulder-to-shoulder with him, winging orders:
"Dear brother, how brutally swift Achilles hunts you—
coursing you round the city of Priam in all his lethal speed!
Come, let us stand our ground together—beat him back."
"Deiphobus!"—Hector, his helmet flashing, called out to her"—
dearest of all my brothers, all these warring years,
of all the sons that Priam and Hecuba produced!
Now I'm determined to praise you all the more,
you who dared—seeing me in these straits—
to venture out from the walls, all for my sake,
while the others stay inside and cling to safety."
The goddess answered quickly, her eyes blazing,
"True, dear brother—how your father and mother both
implored me, time and again, clutching my knees,
and the comrades round me begging me to stay!
Such was the fear that broke them, man for man,
but the heart within me broke with grief for you.
Now headlong on and fight! No letup, no lance spared!
So now, now we'll see if Achilles kills us both
and hauls our bloody armor back to the beaked ships
or he goes down in pain beneath your spear."
Athena luring him on with all her immortal cunning—
and now, at last, as the two came closing for the kill
it was tall Hector, helmet flashing, who led off:
"No more running from you in fear, Achilles!
Not as before. Three times I fled around
the great city of Priam—I lacked courage then
to stand your onslaught. Now my spirit stirs me
to meet you face-to-face. Now kill or be killed!
Come, we'll swear to the gods, the highest witnesses—
the gods will oversee our binding pacts. I swear
I will never mutilate you—merciless as you are—
if Zeus allows me to last it out and tear your life away.
But once I've stripped your glorious armor, Achilles,
I will give your body back to your loyal comrades.
Swear you'll do the same."
A swift dark glance
and the headstrong runner answered, "Hector, stop!
You unforgivable, you . . . don't talk to me of pacts.
There are no binding oaths between men and lions—
wolves and lambs can enjoy no meeting of the minds—
they are all bent on hating each other to the death.
So with you and me. No love between us. No truce
till one or the other falls and gluts with blood
Ares who hacks at men behind his rawhide shield.
Come, call up whatever courage you can muster.
Life or death—now prove yourself a spearman,
a daring man of war! No more escape for you—
Athena will kill you with my spear in just a moment.
Now you'll pay at a stroke for all my comrades' grief,
all you killed in the fury of your spear!"
With that,
shaft poised, he hurled and his spear's long shadow flew
but seeing it coming glorious Hector ducked away,
crouching down, watching the bronze tip fly past
and stab the earth—but Athena snatched it up
and passed it back to Achilles
and Hector the gallant captain never saw her.
He sounded out a challenge to Peleus' princely son:
"You missed, look—the great godlike Achilles!
So you knew nothing at all from Zeus about my death—
and yet how sure you were! All bluff, cunning with words,
that's all you are—trying to make me fear you,
lose my nerve, forget my fighting strength.
Well, you'll never plant your lance in my back
as I flee you in fear—plunge it through my chest
as I come charging in, if a god gives you the chance!
But now it's for you to dodge my brazen spear—
I wish you'd bury it in your body to the hilt.
How much lighter the war would be for Trojans then
if you, their greatest scourge, were dead and gone!"
Shaft poised, he hurled and his spear's long shadow flew
and it struck Achilles' shield—a dead-center hit—
but off and away it glanced and Hector seethed,
his hurtling spear, his whole arm's power poured
in a wasted shot. He stood there, cast down . . .
he had no spear in reserve. So Hector shouted out
to Deiphobus bearing his white shield—with a ringing shout
he called for a heavy lance—
but the man was nowhere near him,
vanished—
yes and Hector knew the truth in his heart
and the fighter cried aloud, "My time has come!
At last the gods have called me down to death.
I thought he was at my side, the hero Deiphobus—
he's safe inside the walls, Athena's tricked me blind.
And now death, grim death is looming up beside me,
no longer far away. No way to escape it now. This,
this was their pleasure after all, sealed long ago—
Zeus and the son of Zeus, the distant deadly Archer—
though often before now they rushed to my defense.
So now I meet my doom. Well let me die—
but not without struggle, not without glory, no,
in some great clash of arms that even men to come
will hear of down the years!"
And on that resolve
he drew the whetted sword that hung at his side,
tempered, massive, and gathering all his force
he swooped like a soaring eagle
launching down from the dark clouds to earth
to snatch some helpless lamb or trembling hare.
So Hector swooped now, swinging his whetted sword
and Achilles charged too, bursting with rage, barbaric,
guarding his chest with the well-wrought blazoned shield,
head tossing his gleaming helmet, four horns strong
and the golden plumes shook that the god of fire
drove in bristling thick along its ridge.
Bright as that star amid the stars in the night sky,
star of the evening, brightest star that rides the heavens,
so fire flared from the sharp point of the spear Achilles
brandished high in his right hand, bent on Hector's death,
scanning his splendid body—where to pierce it best?
The rest of his flesh seemed all encased in armor,
burnished, brazen—Achilles' armor that Hector stripped
from strong Patroclus when he killed him—true,
but one spot lay exposed,
where collarbones lift the neckbone off the shoulders,
the open throat, where the end of life comes quickest—there
as Hector charged in fury brilliant Achilles drove his spear
and the point went stabbing clean through the tender neck
but the heavy bronze weapon failed to slash the windpipe—
Hector could still gasp out some words, some last reply . . .
he crashed in the dust—
godlike Achilles gloried over him:
"Hector—surely you thought when you stripped Patroclus' armor
that you, you would be safe! Never a fear of me—
far from the fighting as I was—you fool!
Left behind there, down by the beaked ships
his great avenger waited, a greater man by far—
that man was I, and I smashed your strength! And you—
the dogs and birds will maul you, shame your corpse
while Achaeans bury my dear friend in glory!"
Struggling for breath, Hector, his helmet flashing,
said, "I beg you, beg you by your life, your parents—
don't let the dogs devour me by the Argive ships!
Wait, take the princely ransom of bronze and gold,
the gifts my father and noble mother will give you—
but give my body to friends to carry home again,
so Trojan men and Trojan women can do me honor
with fitting rites of fire once t am dead."
Staring grimly, the proud runner Achilles answered,
"Beg no more, you fawning dog—begging me by my parents!
Would to god my rage, my fury would drive me now
to hack your flesh away and eat you raw—
such agonies you have caused me! Ransom?
No man alive could keep the dog-packs off you,
not if they haul in ten, twenty times that ransom
and pile it here before me and promise fortunes more—
no, not even if Dardan Priam should offer to weigh out
your bulk in gold! Not even then will your noble mother
lay you on your deathbed, mourn the son she bore . . .
The dogs and birds will rend you—blood and bone!"
At the point of death, Hector, his helmet flashing,
said, "I know you well—I see my fate before me.
Never a chance that I could win you over . . .
Iron inside your chest, that heart of yours.
But now beware, or my curse will draw god's wrath
upon your head, that day when Paris and lord Apollo—
for all your fighting heart—destroy you at the Scaean Gates!"
Death cut him short. The end closed in around him.
Flying free of his limbs
his soul went winging down to the House of Death,
wailing his fate, leaving his manhood far behind,
his young and supple strength. But brilliant Achilles
taunted Hector's body, dead as he was, "Die, die!
For my own death, I'll meet it freely—whenever Zeus
and the other deathless gods would like to bring it on!"
With that he wrenched his bronze spear from the corpse,
laid it aside and ripped the bloody armor off the back.
And the other sons of Achaea, running up around him,
crowded closer, all of them gazing wonder-struck
at the build and marvelous, lithe beauty of Hector.
And not a man came forward who did not stab his body,
glancing toward a comrade, laughing: "Ah, look here—
how much softer he is to handle now, this Hector,
than when he gutted our ships with roaring fire!"
Standing over him, so they'd gloat and stab his body.
But once he had stripped the corpse the proud runner Achilles
took his stand in the midst of all the Argive troops
and urged them on with a flight of winging orders:
"Friends—lords of the Argives, O my captains!
Now that the gods have let me kill this man
who caused us agonies, loss on crushing loss—
more than the rest of all their men combined—
come, let us ring their walls in armor, test them,
see what recourse the Trojans still may have in mind.
Will they abandon the city heights with this man fallen?
Or brace for a last, dying stand though Hector's gone?
But wait—what am I saying? Why this deep debate?
Down by the ships a body lies unwept, unburied—
Patroclus . . . I will never forget him,
not as long as I'm still among the living
and my springing knees will lift and drive me on.
Though the dead forget their dead in the House of Death,
I will remember, even there, my dear companion.
Now,
come, you sons of Achaea, raise a song of triumph!
Down to the ships we march and bear this corpse on high—
we have won ourselves great glory. We have brought
magnificent Hector down, that man the Trojans
glorified in their city like a god!"
So he triumphed
and now he was bent on outrage, on shaming noble Hector.
Piercing the tendons, ankle to heel behind both feet,
he knotted straps of rawhide through them both,
lashed them to his chariot, left the head to drag
and mounting the car, hoisting the famous arms aboard,
he whipped his team to a run and breakneck on they flew,
holding nothing back. And a thick cloud of dust rose up
from the man they dragged, his dark hair swirling round
that head so handsome once, all tumbled low in the dust—
since Zeus had given him over to his enemies now
to be defiled in the land of his own fathers.
So his whole head was dragged down in the dust.
And now his mother began to tear her hair . . .
she flung her shining veil to the ground and raised
a high, shattering scream, looking down at her son.
Pitifully his loving father groaned and round the king
his people cried with grief and wailing seized the city—
for all the world as if all Troy were torched and smoldering
down from the looming brows of the citadel to her roots.
Priam's people could hardly hold the old man back,
frantic, mad to go rushing out the Dardan Gates.
He begged them all, groveling in the filth,
crying out to them, calling each man by name,
"Let go, my friends! Much as you care for me,
let me hurry out of the city, make my way,
all on my own, to Achaea's waiting ships!
I must implore that terrible, violent man . . .
Perhaps—who knows?—he may respect my age,
may pity an old man. He has a father too,
as old as I am—Peleus sired him once,
Peleus reared him to be the scourge of Troy
but most of all to me-he made my life a hell.
So many sons he slaughtered, just coming into bloom . . .
but grieving for all the rest, one breaks my heart
the most and stabbing grief for him will take me down to Death—
my Hector—would to god he had perished in my arms!
Then his mother who bore him—oh so doomed,
she and I could glut ourselves with grief."
So the voice of the king rang out in tears,
the citizens wailed in answer, and noble Hecuba
led the wives of Troy in a throbbing chant of sorrow:
"O my child—my desolation! How can I go on living?
What agonies must I suffer now, now you are dead and gone?
You were my pride throughout the city night and day—
a blessing to us all, the men and women of Troy:
throughout the city they saluted you like a god.
You, you were their greatest glory while you lived—
now death and fate have seized you, dragged you down!"
Her voice rang out in tears, but the wife of Hector
had not heard a thing. No messenger brought the truth
of how her husband made his stand outside the gates.
She was weaving at her loom, deep in the high halls,
working flowered braiding into a dark red folding robe.
And she called her well-kempt women through the house
to set a large three-legged cauldron over the fire
so Hector could have his steaming hot bath
when he came home from battle—poor woman,
she never dreamed how far he was from bathing,
struck down at Achilles' hands by blazing-eyed Athena.
But she heard the groans and wails of grief from the rampart now
and her body shook, her shuttle dropped to the ground,
she called out to her lovely waiting women, "Quickly—
two of you follow me—I must see what's happened.
That cry—that was Hector's honored mother I heard!
My heart's pounding, leaping up in my throat,
the knees beneath me paralyzed—Oh I know it . . .
something terrible's coming down on Priam's children.
Pray god the news will never reach my ears!
Yes but I dread it so—what if great Achilles
has cut my Hector off from the city, daring Hector,
and driven him out across the plain, and all alone?—
He may have put an end to that fatal headstrong pride
that always seized my Hector—never hanging back
with the main force of men, always charging ahead,
giving ground to no man in his fury!"
So she cried,
dashing out of the royal halls like a madwoman,
her heart racing hard, her women close behind her.
But once she reached the tower where soldiers massed
she stopped on the rampart, looked down and saw it all—
saw him dragged before the city, stallions galloping,
dragging Hector back to Achaea's beaked warships—
ruthless work. The world went black as night
before her eyes, she fainted,
falling backward, gasping away her life breath . . .
She flung to the winds her glittering headdress,
the cap and the coronet, braided band and veil,
all the regalia golden Aphrodite gave her once,
the day that Hector, helmet aflash in sunlight,
led her home to Troy from her father's house
with countless wedding gifts to win her heart.
But crowding round her now her husband's sisters
and brothers' wives supported her in their midst,
and she, terrified, stunned to the point of death,
struggling for breath now and coming back to life,
burst out in grief among the Trojan women: "O Hector—
I am destroyed! Both born to the same fate after all!
You, you at Troy in the halls of King Priam—
I at Thebes, under the timberline of Placos,
Eetion's house . . . He raised me as a child,
that man of doom, his daughter just as doomed—
would to god he'd never fathered me!
Now you go down
to the House of Death, the dark depths of the earth,
and leave me here to waste away in grief, a widow
lost in the royal halls—and the boy only a baby,
the son we bore together, you and I so doomed.
Hector, what help are you to him, now you are dead?—
what help is he to you? Think, even if he escapes
the wrenching horrors of war against the Argives,
pain and labor will plague him all his days to come.
Strangers will mark his lands off, stealing his estates.
The day that orphans a youngster cuts him off from friends.
And he hangs his head low, humiliated in every way . . .
his cheeks stained with tears, and pressed by hunger
the boy goes up to his father's old companions,
tugging at one man's cloak, another's tunic,
and some will pity him, true,
and one will give him a little cup to drink,
enough to wet his lips, not quench his thirst.
But then some bully with both his parents living
beats him from the banquet, fists and abuses flying:
'You, get out—you've got no father feasting with us here!'
And the boy, sobbing, trails home to his widowed mother . . .
Astyanax!
And years ago, propped on his father's knee,
he would only eat the marrow, the richest cuts of lamb,
and when sleep came on him and he had quit his play,
cradled warm in his nurse's arms he'd drowse off,
snug in a soft bed, his heart brimmed with joy.
Now what suffering, now he's lost his father—
Astyanax!
The Lord of the City, so the Trojans called him,
because it was you, Hector, you and you alone
who shielded the gates and the long walls of Troy.
But now by the beaked ships, far from your parents,
glistening worms will wriggle through your flesh,
once the dogs have had their fill of your naked corpse—
though we have such stores of clothing laid up in the halls,
fine things, a joy to the eye, the work of women's hands.
Now, by god, I'll bum them all, blazing to the skies!
No use to you now, they'll never shroud your body—
but they will be your glory
burned by the Trojan men and women in your honor!"
Her voice rang out in tears and the women wailed in answer.
So they grieved at Troy while Achaea's troops pulled back.
Once they reached the warships moored at the Hellespont
the contingents scattered, each man to his own ship,
but Achilles still would not dismiss his Myrmidons,
he gave his battle-loving comrades strict commands:
"Charioteers in fast formation—friends to the death!
We must not loose our teams from the war-cars yet.
All in battle-order drive them past Patroclus—
a cortege will mourn the man with teams and chariots.
These are the solemn honors owed the dead. And then,
after we've eased our hearts with tears and dirge,
we free the teams and all take supper here."
All as one
the armies cried out in sorrow, and Achilles led the chant.
Three times they drove their full-maned stallions round the body,
Myrmidon soldiers mourning, and among them Thetis stirred
a deep desire to grieve. And the sands grew wet,
the armor of fighting men grew wet with tears,
such bitter longing he roused . . .
Patroclus, that terror who routed Trojans headlong.
Achilles led them now in a throbbing chant of sorrow,
laying his man-killing hands on his great friend's chest:
"Farewell, Patroclus, even there in the House of Death!
Look—all that I promised once I am performing now:
I've dragged Hector here for the dogs to rip him raw—
and here in front of your flaming pyre I'll cut the throats
of a dozen sons of Troy in all their shining glory,
venting my rage on them for your destruction!"
So he triumphed
and again he was bent on outrage, on shaming noble Hector—
he flung him facedown in the dust beside Patroclus' bier.
And down to the last unit all eased off their armor,
fine burnished bronze, and released their neighing teams
and took their seats by the swift runner Achilles' ship,
Myrmidons in their thousands, and he set before them all
a handsome funeral feast to meet their hearts' desire.
And many pale-white oxen sank on the iron knife,
gasping in slaughter, many sheep and bleating goats
and droves of swine with their long glinting tusks,
succulent, rich with fat. They singed the bristles,
splaying the porkers out across Hephaestus' fire
then poured the blood in cupfuls all around the corpse.
But now their commander, swift Achilles was led away
by Achaea's kings, barely able to bring him round—
still raging for his friend-to feast with Agamemnon.
As soon as the party reached the warlord's tents
they ordered the clear-voiced heralds straightaway
to set a large three-legged cauldron over the fire,
still in hopes of inducing Peleus' royal son
to wash the clotted bloodstains from his body.
He spurned their offer, firmly, even swore an oath:
"No, no, by Zeus-by the highest, greatest god!
It's sacrilege for a single drop to touch my head
till I place Patroclus on his pyre and heap his mound
and cut my hair for him—for a second grief this harsh
will never touch my heart while I am still among the living .. .
But now let us consent to the feasting that I loathe.
And at daybreak, marshal Agamemnon, rouse your troops
to fell and haul in timber, and furnish all that's fitting,
all the dead man needs for his journey down the western dark.
Then, by heaven, the tireless fire can strike his corpse—
the sooner to bum Patroclus from our sight—
and the men turn back to battles they must wage."
So he insisted. They hung on his words, complied,
rushed to prepare the meal, and each man feasted well
and no man's hunger lacked a share of the banquet.
When they had put aside desire.for food and drink
each went his way and slept in his own shelter.
But along the shore as battle lines of breakers
crashed and dragged, Achilles lay down now,
groaning deep from the heart,
near his Myrmidon force but alone on open ground
where over and over rollers washed along the shore.
No sooner had sleep caught him, dissolving all his grief
as mists of refreshing slumber poured around him there—
his powerful frame was bone-weary from charging Hector
straight and hard to the walls of windswept Troy—
than the ghost of stricken Patroclus drifted up . . .
He was like the man to the life, every feature,
the same tall build and the fine eyes and voice
and the very robes that used to clothe his body.
Hovering at his head the phantom rose and spoke:
"Sleeping, Achilles? You've forgotten me, my friend.
You never neglected me in life, only now in death.
Bury me, quickly—et me pass the Gates of Hades.
They hold me off at a distance, all the souls,
the shades of the burnt-out, breathless dead,
never to let me cross the river, mingle with them . . .
They leave me to wander up and down, abandoned, lost
at the House of Death with the all-embracing gates.
Oh give me your hand—I beg you with my tears!
Never, never again shall I return from Hades
once you have given me the soothing rites of fire.
Never again will you and I, alive and breathing,
huddle side-by-side, apart from loyal comrades,
making plans together—never . . . Grim death,
that death assigned from the day that I was born
has spread its hateful jaws to take me down.
And you too,
your fate awaits you too, godlike as you are, Achilles—
to die in battle beneath the proud rich Trojans' walls!
But one thing more. A last request—grant it, please.
Never bury my bones apart from yours, Achilles,
let them lie together . . .
just as we grew up together in your house,
after Menoetius brought me there from Opois,
and only a boy, but banished for bloody murder
the day I killed Amphidamas' son. I was a fool—
I never meant to kill him—quarreling over a dice game.
Then the famous horseman Peleus took me into his halls,
he reared me with kindness, appointed me your aide.
So now let a single urn, the gold two-handled urn
your noble mother gave you, hold our bones-together!"
And the swift runner Achilles reassured him warmly:
"Why have you returned to me here, dear brother, friend?
Why tell me of all that I must do? I'll do it all.
I will obey you, your demands. Oh come closer!
Throw our arms around each other, just for a moment—
take some joy in the tears that numb the heart!"
In the same, breath he stretched his loving arms
but could not seize him, no, the ghost slipped underground
like a wisp of smoke . . . with a high thin cry.
And Achilles sprang up with a start and staring wide,
drove his fists together and cried in desolation, "Ah god!
So even in Death's strong house there is something left,
a ghost, a phantom—true, but no real breath of life.
All night long the ghost of stricken Patroclus
hovered over me, grieving, sharing warm tears,
telling me, point by point, what I must do.
Marvelous—like the man to the life!"
So he cried
and his outcry stirred in them all a deep desire to grieve,
and Dawn with her rose-red fingers shone upon them weeping
round the wretched corpse. At daybreak King Agamemnon
ordered parties of men and mules to haul in timber,
pouring from the tents with a good man in charge,
the lordly Idomeneus' aide-in-arms Meriones.
The troops moved out with loggers' axes in hand
and sturdy cabled ropes as mules trudged on ahead.
Uphill, downhill, crisscross, zigzag on they tramped
and once they reached the slopes of Ida with all her springs,
quickly pitching themselves at towering, leaf-crowned oaks,
they put their backs into strokes of the whetted bronze axes
and huge trunks came crashing down. They split them apart,
lashed the logs to the mules and their hoofs tore up the earth,
dragging them down to level ground through dense brush.
And all the woodcutters hoisted logs themselves—
by command of Idomeneus' good aide Meriones—
and they heaved them down in rows along the beach
at the site Achilles chose to build an immense mound
for Patroclus and himself.
With boundless timber piled
on all sides of the place, down they sat, waiting, massed.
And at once Achilles called his Myrmidons keen for battle:
"Belt yourselves in bronze! Each driver yoke his team!
Chariots harnessed!" 'Up they rose and strapped on armor
and swung aboard the war-cars, drivers, fighters beside them—
and the horse moved out in front, behind came clouds of infantry,
men by thousands, and in their midst his comrades bore Patroclus.
They covered his whole body deep with locks of hair they cut
and cast upon him, and just behind them brilliant Achilles
held the head, in tears—this was his steadfast friend
whom he escorted down to the House of Death.
When they reached the site Achilles had pointed out
they laid Patroclus down and swiftly built his body
a fitting height of timber.
And now the great runner remembered one more duty.
Stepping back from the pyre he cut the red-gold lock
he'd let grow long as a gift to the river god Spercheus—
scanning the wine-dark sea he prayed in anguish, "Spercheus!
All in vain my father Peleus vowed to you that there,
once I had journeyed home to my own dear fatherland,
I'd cut this lock for you and offer splendid victims,
dedicate fifty young ungelded rams to your springs,
there at the spot where your grove and smoking altar standl
So the old king vowed—but you've destroyed his hopes.
Now, since I shall not return to my fatherland,
I'd give my friend this lock . . .
and let the hero Patroclus bear it on his way."
With that,
Achilles placed the lock in his dear comrade's hands
and stirred in the men again a deep desire to grieve.
And now the sunlight would have set upon their tears
if Achilles had not turned to Agamemnon quickly:
"Atrides—you are the first the armies will obey.
Even of sorrow men can have their fill. So now
dismiss them from the pyre, have them prepare
an evening meal. We are the closest to the dead,
we'll see to all things here.
But I'd like the leading captains to remain."
Hearing his wish, the lord of men Agamemnon
dismissed the troops at once to the balanced ships.
But the chief mourners stayed in place, piled timber
and built a pyre a hundred feet in length and breadth
and aloft it laid the corpse with heavy, aching hearts.
And droves of fat sheep and shambling crook-horned cattle
they led before the pyre, skinned and dressed them well.
And the greathearted Achilles, flensing fat from all,
wrapped the corpse with folds of it, head to foot,
then heaped the flayed carcasses round Patroclus.
He set two-handled jars of honey and oil beside him,
leaned them against the bier—and then with wild zeal
slung the bodies of four massive stallions onto the pyre
and gave a wrenching groan. And the dead lord Patroclus
had fed nine dogs at table—he slit the throats of two,
threw them onto the pyre and then a dozen brave sons
of the proud Trojans he hacked to pieces with his bronze . . .
Achilles' mighty heart was erupting now with slaughter—
he loosed the iron rage of fire to consume them all
and cried out, calling his dear friend by name,
"Farewell, Patroclus, even there in the House of Death!
All that I promised once I have performed at last.
Here are twelve brave sons of the proud Trojans—
all, the fire that feeds on you devours them all
but not Hector the royal son of Priam, Hector
I will never give to the hungry flames—
wild dogs will bolt his flesh!"
So he threatened
but the dogs were not about to feed on Hector.
Aphrodite daughter of Zeus beat off the packs,
day and night, anointing Hector's body with oil,
ambrosial oil of roses, so Achilles could not rip
the prince's skin as he dragged him back and forth.
And round him Phoebus Apollo brought a dark cloud down
from high sky to the plain to shroud the entire space
where Hector's body lay, before the sun's white fury
could sear away his flesh, his limbs and sinews.
But the pyre of dead Patroclus was not burning-
and the swift runner Achilles thought of what to do.
Stepping back from the pyre he prayed to the two winds—
Zephyr and Boreas, West and North—promised splendid victims
and pouring generous, brimming cups from a golden goblet,
begged them to come, so the wood might burst in flame
and the dead bum down to ash with all good speed.
And Iris, hearing his prayers, rushed the message on
to the winds that gathered now in stormy Zephyr's halls
to share his brawling banquet. Iris swept to a stop
and once they saw her poised at the stone threshold
all sprang up, each urged her to sit beside him
but she refused, pressing on with her message:
"No time for sitting now. No, I must return
to the Ocean's running stream, the Aethiopians' land.
They are making a splendid sacrifice to the gods—
I must not miss my share of the sacred feast.
But I bring Achilles' prayers!
He begs you to come at once, Boreas, blustering Zephyr,
he promises splendid victims-come with a strong blast
and light the pyre where Patroclus lies in state
and all the Argive armies mourn around him!"
Message delivered, off she sped as the winds rose
with a superhuman roar, stampeding clouds before them.
Suddenly reaching the open sea in gale force,
whipping whitecaps under a shrilling killer-squall
.they raised the good rich soil of Troy and struck the pyre
and a huge inhuman blaze went howling up the skies.
All night long they hurled the flames-massed on the pyre,
blast on screaming blast—and all night long the swift Achilles,
lifting a two-handled cup, dipped wine from a golden bowl
and poured it down on the ground and drenched the earth,
calling out to the ghost of stricken, gaunt Patroclus.
As a father weeps when he burns his son's bones,
dead on his wedding day,
and his death has plunged his parents in despair .. .
so Achilles wept as he burned his dear friend's bones,
dragging himself around the pyre, choked with sobs.
At that hour the morning star comes rising up
to herald a new day on earth, and riding in its wake
the Dawn flings out her golden robe across the sea,
the funeral fires sank low, the flames died down.
And the winds swung round and headed home again,
over the Thracian Sea, and the heaving swells moaned.
And at last Achilles, turning away from the corpse-fire,
sank down, exhausted. Sweet sleep overwhelmed him.
But Agamemnon's followers grouped together now
and as they approached Achilles,
the din and trampling of their feet awoke him.
He sat up with a start and made his wishes known:
"Atrides—chiefs of Achaea's united forces—
first put out the fires with glistening wine,
wherever the flames still burn in all their fury.
Then let us collect the bones of Menoetius' son Patroclus,
pick them out with care-but they cannot be mistaken:
he lay amidst the pyre, apart from all the others
burned at the edge, the ruck of men and horses.
Then let us place his bones in a golden urn,
sealed tight and dry with a double fold of fat,
till I myself lie hid in the strong House, of Death.
For his barrow, build him nothing large, I ask you,
something right for the moment. And then, later,
Achaeans can work to make it broad and lofty,
all who survive me here,
alive in the benched ships when I am gone."
And the men obeyed the swift runner's orders.
They first put out the fires with glistening wine,
far as the flames had spread and the ashes bedded deep.
In tears they gathered their gentle comrade's white bones,
all in a golden urn, sealed with a double fold of fat,
and stowed the urn in his shelter, covered well
with a light linen shroud, then laid his barrow out.
Around the pyre they planted a ring of stone revetments,
piled the loose earth high in a mound above the ring
and once they'd heaped the barrow turned to leave.
But Achilles held the armies on the spot.
He had them sit in a great and growing circle—
now for funeral games—and brought from his ships
the trophies for the contests: cauldrons and tripods,
stallions, mules and cattle with massive heads,
women sashed and lovely, and gleaming gray iron.
First,
for the fastest charioteers he set out glittering prizes:
a woman to lead away, flawless, skilled in crafts,
and a two-eared tripod, twenty-two measures deep—
all that for the first prize.
Then for the runner-up he brought forth a mare,
unbroken, six years old, with a mule foal in her womb.
For the third he produced a fine four-measure cauldron
never scorched by flames, its sheen as bright as new.
For the fourth he set out two gold bars, for the fifth,
untouched by fire as well, a good two-handled jar.
And he rose up tall and challenged all the Argives:
"Atrides—Achaeans-at-arms! Let the games beginl
The trophies lie afield-they await the charioteers.
If we held our games now in another hero's honor,
surely I'd walk off to my tent with first prize.
You know how my team outstrips all others' speed.
Immortal horses they are, Poseidon gave them himself
to my father Peleus, Peleus passed them on to me.
But I and our fast stallions will not race today,
so strong his fame, the charioteer they've lost,
so kind—always washing them down with fresh water,
sleeking their long manes with smooth olive oil.
No wonder they stand here, mourning . . .
look, trailing those very manes along the ground.
They both refuse to move, saddled down with grief.
But all the rest of you, come, all Achaeans in camp
who trust to your teams and bolted chariots—
take your places now!"
Achilles' call rang out
and it brought the fastest drivers crowding forward.
The first by far, Eumelus lord of men sprang up,
Admetus' prized son who excelled in horsemanship
and following him Tydides, powerful Diomedes,
yoking the breed of Tros he'd wrested from Aeneas
just the other day when Apollo saved their master.
Then Atreus' son Menelaus, the red-haired captain
born of the gods, leading under the yoke his racers,
Blaze, Agamemnon's mare, and his own stallion Brightfoot.
Anchises' son Echepolus gave Agamemnon Blaze,
a gift that bought him off from the king's armies
bound for windy Troy: he'd stay right where he was,
a happy man, since Zeus had given him vast wealth
and he lived in style on Sicyon's broad dancing rings.
His was the mare Atrides harnessed, champing for the race.
And the fourth to yoke his full-maned team was Antilochus,
the splendid son of Nestor the old high-hearted king,
lord Neleus' offspring. A team of Pylian purebreds
drew his chariot. His father stood at his side,
lending sound advice to the boy's own good sense:
"Young as you are, Antilochus, how the gods have loved you!
Zeus and Poseidon taught you horsemanship, every sort,
so there's no great need for me to set you straight.
Well you know how to double round the post . . .
but you've got the slowest nags—a handicap, I'd say.
Yet even if other teams are faster, look at their drivers:
there's not a trick in their whips that you don't have at hand.
So plan your attack, my friend, muster all your skills
or watch the prize slip by!
It's skill, not brawn, that makes the finest woodsman.
By skill, too, the captain holds his ship on course,
scudding the wine-dark sea though rocked by gales.
By skill alone, charioteer outraces charioteer.
The average driver, leaving all to team and car,
recklessly makes his turn, veering left and right,
his pair swerving over the course-he can't control them.
But the cunning driver, even handling slower horses,
always watches the post, turns it close, never loses
the first chance to relax his reins and stretch his pair
but he holds them tight till then, eyes on the leader.
Now, the turn itself—it's clear, you cannot miss it.
There's a dead tree-stump standing six feet high,
it's oak or pine, not rotted through by the rains,
and it's propped by two white stones on either side.
That's your halfway mark where the homestretch starts
and there's plenty of good smooth racing-room around it—
it's either the grave-mound of a man dead long ago
or men who lived before us set it up as a goal.
Now, in any event, swift Achilles makes it
his turning-post. And you must hug it close
as you haul your team and chariot round but you
in your tight-strung car, you lean to the left yourself,
just a bit as you whip your right-hand horse, hard,
shout him on, slacken your grip and give him rein.
But make your left horse hug that post so close
the hub of your well-turned wheel will almost seem
to scrape the rock—just careful not to graze it!
You'll maim your team, you'll smash your car to pieces.
A joy to your rivals, rank disgrace to yourself .. .
So keep your head, my boy, be on the lookout.
Trail the field. out but pass them all at the post,
no one can catch you then or overtake you with a surge—
not if the man behind you were driving huge Arion,
Adrastus' lightning stallion sired by the gods,
or Laomedon's team, the .greatest bred in Troy."
Nestor sat down again. He'd shown his son the ropes,
the last word in the master horseman's skills.
Now after Meriones yoked his sleek horses fifth,
they boarded their cars and dropped lots in a helmet.
Achilles shook it hard—Antilochus' lot leapt out
so he drew the inside track.
Next in the draw came hardy lord Eumelus,
Atrides Menelaus the famous spearman next
and Meriones drew the fourth starting-lane
and Tydides Diomedes drew the fifth and last,
the best of them all by far at driving battle-teams.
All pulled up abreast as Achilles pointed out the post,
far off on the level plain, and stationed there beside it
an umpire, old lord Phoenix, his father's aide-in-arms,
to mark the field at the turn and make a true report.
Ready—
whips raised high—
at the signal all together
lashed their horses' backs and shouted, urging them on—
they broke in, a burst of speed, in no time swept the plain,
leaving the ships behind and lifting under their chests
the dust clung to the teams like clouds or swirling gales
as their manes went streaming back in the gusty tearing wind.
The cars shot on, now jouncing along the earth that rears us all,
now bounding clear in the air but the drivers kept erect
in the lurching cars and the heart of each man raced,
straining for victory—each man yelled at his pair
as they flew across the plain in a whirl of dust.
But just out of the turn,
starting the homestretch back to sunlit sea
the horses lunged, each driver showed his form,
the whole field went racing full tilt and at once
the fast mares of Eumelus surged far out in front—
And after him came Diomedes' team, Tros's stallions
hardly a length behind now, closing at each stride
and at any moment it seemed they'd mount Eumelus' car,
their hot breath steaming his back and broad shoulders,
their heads hovering over him, breakneck on they flew—
and now he'd have passed him or forced a dead heat
if Apollo all of a sudden raging at Diomedes
had not knocked the shining whip from his fist.
Tears of rage came streaming down his cheeks
as he watched Eumelus' mares pulling farther ahead
and his team losing pace, no whip to lash them on . . .
But Athena, missing nothing of Phoebus' foul play
that robbed Diomedes, sped to the gallant captain,
handed him back his whip, primed his team with power
and flying after Admetus' son in full immortal fury
the goddess smashed his yoke. His mares bolted apart,
careening off the track and his pole plowed the ground
and Eumelus hurled from the chariot, tumbling over the wheel,
the skin was ripped from his elbows, mouth and nostrils,
his forehead battered in, scraped raw at the brows,
tears filling his eyes, his booming voice choked—
But veering round the wreck Diomedes steered his racers
shooting far ahead of the rest, leaving them in the dust
as Athena fired his team and gave the man his glory.
And after him came Atrides, red-haired Menelaus;
next Antilochus, urging his father's horses:
"Drive, the two of you—full stretch and fast!
I don't tell you to match the leader's speed,
skilled Diomedes' team—look, Athena herself
just fired their pace and gave their master glory.
But catch Menelaus' pair—fast—don't get left behind—
or Blaze will shower the two of you with disgrace—
Blaze is a mare! Why falling back, my brave ones?
I warn you both—so help me it's the truth—
no more grooming for you at Nestor's hands!
The old driver will slaughter you on the spot
with a sharp bronze blade if you slack off now
and we take a lesser prize. After them, faster—
full gallop—I'll find the way, I've got the skill
to slip past him there where the track narrows—
I'll never miss my chance!"
Whipped with fear
by their master's threats they put on a fresh burst
for a length or two but suddenly brave Antilochus
saw the narrow place where the road washed out—
a sharp dip in the land where massing winter rains
broke off the edge, making it all one sunken rut.
There Atrides was heading-no room for two abreast—
but Antilochus swerved to pass him, lashing his horses
off the track then swerving into him neck-and-neck
and Atrides, frightened, yelled out at the man,
"Antilochus—you drive like a maniac! Hold your horses!
The track's too narrow here—it widens soon for passing—
watch out—you'll crash your chariot, wreck us both!"
So he cried but Antilochus drove on all the wilder,
cracking his lash for more speed like a man stone deaf.
As far as a full shoulder-throw of a whirling discus
hurled by a young contender testing out his strength,
so far they raced dead even. But then Menelaus' pair
dropped back as he yielded, cut the pace on purpose—
he feared the massive teams would collide on the track
and the tight-strung cars capsize, the men themselves
go sprawling into the dust, striving, wild for triumph.
As his rival passed the red-haired captain cursed him:
"Antilochus—no one alive more treacherous than you!
Away with you, madman—damn you!
How wrong we were when we said you had good sense.
You'll never take the prize unless you take the oath!"
Turning back to his team, calling, shouting them on:
"Don't hold back, don't stop now-galled as you are—
that team in the lead will sag in the leg before you—
robbed of their prime, their racing days are done!"
And lashed with fear by their master's angry voice
they put on a surge, closing on them fast.
And all the while
the armies tense in a broad circle watched for horses
flying back on the plain in a rising whirl of dust.
The first to make them out was the Cretan captain.
Idomeneus sat perched on a rise outside the ring,
a commanding lookout point, and hearing a driver
shouting out in the distance, recognized the voice,
could see a stallion too—far in the lead, unmistakable—
a big chestnut beauty, all but the blaze he sported
stark white on his forehead, round as a full moon.
He sprang to his feet, calling down to cohorts,
"Friends—lords of the Argives, 0 my captains—
am I the only one who can spot that pair
or can you see them too?
Seems to me it's a new team out in front,
a new driver as well, just coming into sight.
The mares of Eumelus must have come to grief,
somewhere downfield-they led on the way out.
I saw them heading first for the turn, by god,
but I can't find them now—anywhere—hard as I look,
left and right, scanning the whole Trojan plain.
He lost his reins, he lost control of his horses
round the post and they failed to make the turn—
that's where he got thrown, I'd say, his chariot smashed
and his horses went berserk and bolted off.
Stand up,
look for yourselves! I can't make them out . . .
not for certain, no, but the leader seems to me
an Aetolian man by birth-he's king of the Argives,
horse-breaking Tydeus' son, rugged Diomedes!"
But quick Little Ajax rounded on him roughly:
"Loose talk, Idomeneus—why are you always sounding off?
They still have a way to go out there, those racing teams.
You too, you're a far cry from the youngest Argive here,
nor are the eyes in your head our sharpest scouts
but you're always blustering, you, you foul-mouthed—
why must we have you blurting out this way
in the face of keener men?
Those mares in front are the same that led before—
they're Eumelus' mares, look, and there's Eumelus now,
astride his chariot, gripping the reins himself!"
But the Cretan captain burst back in answer,
"Ajax, champion wrangler in all the ranks! Stupid too,
first and last the worst man in the Argive armies—
stubborn, bullnecked fool. Come now,
let's both put up a tripod or a cauldron,
wager which horses are really out in front
and we'll make Atrides Agamemnon our referee—
you'll learn, don't worry, once you pay the price!"
Ajax rose in fury to trade him taunt for taunt,
and now the two of them might have come to blows
if Achilles himself had not stood up to calm them:
"Enough! No more trading your stinging insults now,
Ajax, Idomeneus! It's offensive—this is not the time.
You'd be the first to blame a man who railed this way.
Sit down in the ring, you two, and watch the horses—
they'll be home in a moment, racing hard to win.
Then each can see for himself who comes in second,
who takes off first prize."
In the same breath
Diomedes came on storming toward them-closer, look,
closing—lashing his team nonstop, full-shoulder strokes,
making them kick high as they hurtled toward the goal.
Constant sprays of dust kept pelting back on the driver,
the chariot sheathed in gold and tin careering on
in the plunging stallions' wake, its spinning rims
hardly leaving a rut behind in the thin dust
as the team thundered in—a whirlwind finish!
He reined them back in the ring with drenching sweat,
lather streaming down to the ground from necks and chests.
Their master leapt down from the bright. burnished car,
propped his whip on the yoke. His aide lost no time—
the hardy Sthenelus rushed to collect the prizes,
gave their proud troops the woman to lead away
and they carried off the handsome two-eared tripod
as he was loosing the horses from the harness . . .
Antilochus next—the son of Nestor drove in second,
beating Atrides not by speed but cunning—
but still Menelaus kept his racers close behind.
Tight as the closing gap between the wheel and horse
when he hauls his master's car top speed across the flats,
the very tip of his tail brushing the running-rim
and the wheel spins closer, hardly a gap between
as he sweeps the open plain—that much, no more,
Menelaus trailed Antilochus, dauntless driver.
At first he'd trailed him a full discus-throw
but now he was closing, gaining on him fast—
yes, Blaze with all her fury and flowing mane,
Agamemnon's mare was coming on with a strong surge
and now if the two teams had a longer course to run
Menelaus would have passed him—no dead heat about it.
Then Idomeneus' good aide Meriones came in fourth,
trailing the famed Atrides by a spear-throw.
His team had sleek manes but the slowest pace afield
and the man himself was the poorest racing-driver.
But Admetus' son Eumelus came in last of all . . .
dragging his fine chariot, flogging his team before him.
Seeing him there the swift Achilles filled with pity,
rose in their midst and said these winging words:
"The best man drives his purebred team home last!
Come, let's give him a prize, it's only right
but second prize, of course—
Tydeus' son must carry off the first."
So he said
and the armies called assent to what he urged.
And now, spurred by his comrades' quick approval,
Achilles was just about to give the man the mare
when Antilochus, son of magnanimous old Nestor,
leapt to his feet and lodged a formal protest:
"Achilles—I'll be furious if you carry out that plan!
Do you really mean to strip me of my prize?—
so concerned that his team and car were wrecked,
and the fellow too, for all his racing skills.
Why, he should have prayed to the deathless gods!
Then he would never have finished last of all.
You pity the man? You're fond of him, are you?
You have hoards of gold in your tents, bronze, sheep,
serving-girls by the score and purebred racers too:
pick some bigger trophy out of the whole lot
and hand it on to the man, but do it later—
or now, at once, and win your troops' applause.
I won't give up the mare! The one who wants her—
step this way and try—
he'll have to fight me for her with his fists!"
He flared up and the swift runner Achilles smiled,
delighting in Antilochus—he liked the man immensely.
He answered him warmly, winged words: "Antilochus,
you want me to fetch an extra gift from my tents,
a consolation prize for Eumelus? I'm glad to do it.
I'll give him the breastplate I took from Asteropaeus.
It's solid bronze with a glittering overlay of tin,
rings on rings. A gift he'll value highly."
He asked Automedon, ready aide, to bring
the breastplate from his tents. He went and brought it,
handed it to Eumelus. The man received it gladly.
But now Menelaus rose, his heart smoldering,
still holding a stubborn grudge against Antilochus.
A crier put a staff in his hands and called for silence.
And with all his royal weight Atrides thundered, "Antilochus—
you used to have good sense! Now see what you've done!
Disgraced my horsemanship—you've fouled my horses,
cutting before me, you with your far slower team.
Quickly, lords of the Argives, all my captains,
judge between us—impartially, no favoritism—
so none of our bronze-armed men can ever say,
'Only with lies did Atrides beat Antilochus out
and walk off with the mare—his team was far slower
but the king's own rank and power took the prize!'
Wait, I'll settle things myself. I have no fear
that any Achaean will accuse me: I'll be fair.
Come over here, Antilochus, royal prince—
this is the old custom. Come, stand in front
of your team and chariot, grasp the coiling whip
that lashed them home, lay your hand on their manes
and swear by the mighty god who grips and shakes the earth
you never blocked my chariot—not by deliberate foul."
Antilochus came to his senses, backed off quickly:
"No more, please. I am much younger than you are,
lord Menelaus—you're my senior, you the greater man.
Well you know how the whims of youth break all the rules.
Our wits quicker than wind, our judgment just as flighty.
Bear with me now. I'll give you this mare I won—
of my own accord. And any finer trophy you'd ask
from my own stores, I'd volunteer at once,
gladly, Atrides, my royal king—anything
but fall from your favor all my days to come
and swear a false oath in the eyes of every god."
With that the son of magnanimous old Nestor
led the mare and turned her over to Menelaus' hands.
And his heart melted now like the dew that wets the corn
when the fresh stalks rise up and the ripe fields ripple—
so the heart in your chest was melted now, Menelaus,
and you gave your friend an answer, winged words:
"Antilochus, now it is my turn to yield to you,
for all my mounting anger . . .
you who were never wild or reckless in the past.
It's only youth that got the better of your discretion,
just this once—but the next time be more careful.
Try to refrain from cheating your superiors.
No other Achaean could have brought me round so soon,
but seeing that you have suffered much and labored long,
your noble father, your brother too-all for my sake—
I'll yield to your appeal, I'll even give you the mare,
though she is mine, so our people here will know
the heart inside me is never rigid, unrelenting."
He handed back the mare to Antilochus' man.
Noemon led her off while Atrides took instead
the polished cauldron bright in all its sheen.
Meriones, who had come in fourth took fourth prize,
the two bars of gold. That left the fifth unclaimed,
the jar with double handles. Bearing it through the crowd
Achilles gave it to Nestor, standing close beside him,
urging, "Here, old friend-a trophy for you too!
Lay it away as a treasure . . .
let it remind you of the burial of Patroclus.
Never again will you see him among the Argives.
I give you this prize, a gift for giving's sake,
for now you will never fight with fists or wrestle,
or enter the spear-throw, or race on sprinting feet.
The burdens of old age already weigh you down."
And Achilles placed the trophy in Nestor's hands.
He thrilled to have it and spoke out winging words:
"True, true, my son, all of it, right on the mark.
My legs no longer firm, my friend, dead on my feet,
nor do my arms go shooting from my shoulders—
the stunning punch, the left and right are gone.,
Oh make me young again, and the strength inside me
steady as a rock! As fresh as I was that day
the Epeans buried lord Amarynceus in Buprasion
and his sons held games to celebrate the king .. .
No one could match me there, none among the Epeans,
not even our own Pylians, or Aetolia's hardy men.
At boxing I destroyed Clytomedes, Enops' boy.
Ancaeus of Pleuron wrestled against me—down he went.
Fast as Iphiclus was, I raced him to his knees,
with a spear I outhurled Phyleus, Polydorus too.
Only at chariot-racing the sons of Actor beat me—
two against one, cutting before me, hellbent to win,
for the biggest prize was left for the last event.
But it took twins—one with the reins rock-steady,
holding them rock-steady, the other lashed the team.
So that's the man I was . . . but now's the time
for the younger men to lock in rough encounters,
time for me to yield to the pains of old age.
But there was a day I shone among the champions.
Well,
you must get on with your friend's burial now—
the games must go on—
but I accept this gladly, my old heart rejoices.
You never forget my friendship, never miss a chance
to pay me the honor I deserve among our comrades.
For all that you have done for me, Achilles,
may the immortals fill your cup with joy!"
He savored every word of Nestor's story.
Then Achilles made his way through crowds of troops
and set out prizes next for the bruising boxing-match.
He fetched and tethered a heavy-duty mule in the ring,
six years old, unbroken—the hardest kind to break—
and offered the loser a cup with double handles.
He rose up tall and challenged all the Argives:
"Son of Atreus—all you Achaean men-at-arms!
We invite two men—our best—to compete for these.
Put up your fists, fight for what you're worth.
The man that Apollo helps outlast the other—
clearly witnessed here by Achaea's armies—
he takes this beast of burden back to his tents
but the one he beats can have the two-eared cup."
And a powerful, huge man loomed up at once,
Panopeus' son Epeus, the famous boxing champion.
He clamped a hand on the draft mule and shouted,
"Step right up and get it—whoever wants that cup!,
This mule is mine, I tell you. No Achaean in sight
will knock me out and take her—I am the greatest!
So what if I'm not a world-class man of war?
How can a man be first in all events?
I warn you, soldiers—so help me it's the truth—
I'll crush you with body-blows, I'll crack your ribs to splinters!
You keep your family mourners near to cart you off—
once my fists have worked you down to pulp!"
Dead silence. So the armies met his challenge.
Only Euryalus rose to take him on, heroic volunteer,
bred of Talaus' blood and a son of King Mecisteus
who went to Thebes in the old days, when Oedipus fell,
and there at his funeral games defeated all the Thebans.
The spearman Diomedes served as the man's second,
goading him oft, intent to see him win.
First he cinched him round with the boxer's belt
then taking rawhide thongs, cut from a field-ox,
wrapped his knuckles well.
Both champions, belted tight,
stepped into the ring. squared off at each other and let loose,
trading jabs with their clenched fists then slugged it out—
flurries of jolting punches, terrific grinding of jaws,
sweat rivering, bodies glistening—suddenly Euryalus
glanced for an opening, dropped his guard and Epeus hurled
his smashing roundhouse hook to the head—a knockout blow!
He could keep his feet no longer, knees caved in on the spot—
as under the ruffling North Wind a fish goes arching up
and flops back down on a beach-break strewn with seaweed
and a dark wave blacks him out. So he left his feet
and down he went—out cold—but big-hearted Epeus
hoisted him in his arms and stood him upright.
A band of loyal followers rushed to help him,
led him out of the ring, his feet dragging,
head lolling to one side, spitting clots of blood . . .
still senseless after they propped him in their comer,
and they had to fetch the two-eared cup themselves.
Quickly
Achilles displayed before the troops the prizes set
for the third event, the grueling wrestling-match.
For the winner a large tripod made to stride a fire
and worth a dozen oxen, so the soldiers reckoned.
For the loser he led a woman through their midst,
worth four, they thought, and skilled in many crafts.
And he rose up tall and challenged all the Achaeans:
"Now two come forward—fight to win this prize!"
And the giant Ajax got to his feet at once,
Odysseus stood up too,
an expert at every subtle, cunning hold.
Both champions, belted tight, stepped into the ring
and grappling each other hard with big burly arms,
locked like rafters a master builder bolts together,
slanting into a pitched roof to fight the ripping winds.
And their backbones creaked as scuffling hands tugged
for submission-holds and sweat streamed down their spines
and clusters of raw welts broke out on ribs and shoulders
slippery, red with blood, and still they grappled, harder,
locking for victory, locked for that burnished tripod:
Odysseus no more able to trip and bring to ground
his man than Ajax could—Odysseus' brawn held out.
A stalemate. And the troops were growing bored,
so at last the giant Ajax spurred his rival,
grunting, "Son of Laertes—resourceful one, enough—
you hoist me or I hoist you-and leave the rest to Zeus."
As Ajax heaved him up Odysseus never missed a trick—
he kicked him behind the knee, clipping the hollow,
cut his legs from under him, knocked him backward—
pinned as Odysseus flung himself across his chest!
That roused the crowd, they leaned to look and marveled.
The next throw now—long-enduring Odysseus' turn . . .
he tried to hoist Great Ajax, budged him a little
off the ground, true, but he could not heave him clear,
then hooked him round a knee and down they sprawled together,
both men clenched in a death-lock, tussling round in dust.
And now they'd have jumped up, gone for the third fall
if Achilles himself had not stepped in and stopped them:
"No more struggling-don't kill yourselves in sport!
Victory goes to both. Share the prizes. Off you go,
so the rest of the men can have a crack at contests."
And they listened gladly, nodding at his decision,
wiped the dust from their backs and pulled their shirts on.
Achilles quickly set out prizes for the footrace.
A silver bowl, gorgeous, just six measures deep
but the finest mixing bowl in all the world.
Nothing could match its beauty—a masterpiece
that skilled Sidonian craftsmen wrought to perfection,
Phoenician traders shipped across the misty seas
and mooring in Thoas' roads, presented to the king.
Euneus son of Jason gave it to Prince Patroclus,
the ransom paid to release Lycaon, Priam's son.
This was the bowl Achilles offered up at games
to commemorate his great friend—for the one racer
who proved the fastest on his feet. For the runner-up
he produced a massive ox with rippling folds of fat
and half a bar of gold for him who came in last.
He rose up tall and challenged all the Achaeans:
"Now men come forward, fight to win this prize!"
And the racing Oilean Ajax sprang up at once,
Odysseus quick at tactics too, then Nestor's son,
Antilochus, fastest of all the young men in the ranks.
Achilles pointed out the post . . .
They toed the line—
and broke flat out from the start and Ajax shot ahead
with quick Odysseus coming right behind him, close
as the weaver's rod to a well-sashed woman's breast
when she deftly pulls it toward her, shooting the spool
across the warp, still closer, pressing her breast—
so close Odysseus sprinted, hot on Ajax' heels,
feet hitting his tracks before the dust could settle
and quick Odysseus panting, breathing down his neck,
always forcing the pace and all the Argives shouting,
cheering him on as he strained for triumph, sprinting on
and fast in the homestretch, spurting toward the goal
Odysseus prayed in his heart to blazing-eyed Athena,
"Hear me, Goddess, help me-hurry, urge me on!"
So Odysseus prayed and Athena heard his prayer,
put spring in his limbs, his feet, his fighting hands
and just as the whole field came lunging in for the trophy
Ajax slipped at a dead run—Athena tripped him up—
right where the dung lay slick from bellowing cattle
the swift runner Achilles slew in Patroclus' honor.
Dung stuffed his mouth, his nostrils dripped muck
as shining long-enduring Odysseus flashed past him
to come in first by far and carry off the cup
while Ajax took the ox. The racer in all his glory
just stood there, clutching one of the beast's horns,
spitting out the dung and sputtering to his comrades,
"Foul, by heaven! The goddess fouled my finish!
Always beside Odysseus—just like the man's mother,
rushing to put his rivals in the dust."
They all roared with laughter at his expense.
Antilochus came in last and carried off his prize
with a broad smile and a joke to warm his comrades:
"I'll tell you something you've always known, my friends—
down to this very day the gods prefer-old-timers.
Look at Ajax now, with only a few years on me.
But Odysseus—why, he's out of the dark ages,
one of the old relics—
but in green old age, they say. No mean feat
to beat him out in a race, for all but our Achilles."
Bantering so, but he flattered swift Achilles
and the matchless runner paid him back in kind:
"Antilochus, how can I let your praise go unrewarded?
Here's more gold—a half-bar more in the bargain."
He placed it in his hands, and he was glad to have it.
Then Achilles carried into the armies' broad ring
a spear trailing its long shadow, laid it down
and beside it placed a battle-shield and helmet,
the arms Patroclus stripped from lord Sarpedon.
And Achilles rose and challenged all the Argives:
"We invite two men—our best—to compete for these.
Full battle-gear, take up your slashing bronze lances.
Fight it out with each other, duel before the troops!
The soldier who gets in first and cuts a rival's flesh,
who pierces armor to draw blood and reach his entrails—
I'll give that man this broadsword, silver-studded,
handsome Thracian work I stripped from Asteropaeus.
But both fighters will share this armor, bear it off,
and we'll give them a victor's banquet in our tents."
Huge Telamonian Ajax rose to meet the challenge,
Tydeus' son rose too, the powerful Diomedes.
Both men armed at opposite sides of the forces,
into the ring they strode and met, burning for battle,
glances menacing, wild excitement seizing all their comrades.
And just coming in range, just closing on each other . . .
they made three rapid charges, three lunges and then—
Ajax stabbed through Tydides' round balanced shield
but failed to reach his flesh-saved by the breastplate
just behind the buckler! But now Diomedes thrusting
over the giant's massive shield, again and again,
threatened to graze his throat—the spearpoint glinting sharp—
and such terror for Ajax struck his Argive friends
they cried for them to stop, to divide the prizes,
"Share and share alike!" But the hero Achilles
took the great long sword and gave it to Diomedes,
slung in its sheath on a supple, well-cut sword-strap.
And now Achilles set out a lump of pig iron,
the shot Eetion used to put with all his power
before the swift runner Pelides brought him down
and hauled it off in the ships with all his other wealth.
Achilles rose up tall and challenged every Achaean:
"Now men come forward—compete to win this prize!
An ingot big enough to keep the winner in iron
for five wheeling years. Though his rich estates
lie far away in the country, it won't be want of iron
that brings his shepherd or plowman into town—
he'll be well-stocked at home."
That was his offer.
Up stood Polypoetes, always braced for battle,
Leonteus flanked him, strong, intense as a god,
then Telamon's son Great Ajax, lord Epeus too.
They stood in a row. Big Epeus hefted the iron,
swung and heaved it—and comrades burst out laughing.
Next the veteran; Leonteus gave the weight a hurl,
then Ajax came up third and the giant flung it hard
with his rippling brawny arm to pass all other marks.
But then Polypoetes braced for battle took the weight
and far as a seasoned herdsman flings his throwing staff,
whirling in flight across his cows to keep them all in line—
so far he outhurled the whole field. The armies roared.
And the powerful Polypoetes' men sprang up to bear
the king's trophy back to their hollow ships.
Archery next—
and again Achilles set out iron, dark gray trophies,
ten double-headed axes, ten with single heads.
He stepped the mast of a dark-prowed man-of-war
far down the beach and tethered a fluttering dove
atop the pole, its foot looped with a light cord,
then challenged men to shoot and hit that mark:
"The man who hits the fluttering dove up there
can carry the whole array of double-axes home!
Whoever misses the bird but still hits the cord—
he's the loser, true, but he takes the single heads."
Teucer the master archer rose to meet the challenge,
Meriones joined him, Idomeneus' rough-and-ready aide.
They dropped lots in a bronze helmet, shook it hard
and the lot fell to Teucer to shoot first . . .
He quickly loosed an arrow, full-draw force
but never swore to the Archer
he'd slaughter splendid victims, newborn lambs,
so he missed the dove—Apollo grudged him that—
but he hit the cord that tethered the bird's foot,
the tearing arrow split the cord straight through
and the bird shot into the sky and left the tether
dangling down to ground. The armies roared applause.
But already clutching a shaft while Teucer aimed
Meriones leapt to snatch the bow from his hand
and quickly swore to the distant deadly Archer
he'd slaughter splendid victims, newborn lambs—
Up under the clouds he glimpsed the fluttering dove
and there as she wheeled he hit her right beneath the wing
and straight through the heart and out the arrow passed,
plunged at Meriones' foot and stabbed the earth hard.
The dove settled onto the mast of the dark-prowed ship,
her neck wrenched awry, her beating wings went slack
and life breath flew from her limbs that instant
down she dropped, a long drop down to the ground.
The armies looked on wonder-struck and marveled.
Meriones carried off the double-axes, all ten,
Teucer took the singles back to his hollow ships.
Finally
Achilles produced a spear that trailed its long shadow,
a cauldron too, untouched by fire, chased with flowers
and worth an ox, and set them down in the ring.
And now the spear-throwers rose up to compete,
Atrides Agamemnon, lord of the far-flung kingdoms,
flanked by Idomeneus' rough-and-ready aide Meriones
but the swift runner Achilles interceded at once:
"Atrides—well we know how far you excel us all:
no one can match your strength at throwing spears,
you are the best by far!
Take first prize and return to your hollow ships
while we award this spear to the fighter Meriones,
if that would please your heart. That's what I propose."
And Agamemnon the lord of men could not resist.
Achilles gave the bronze-shod spear to Meriones.
And the winning hero Atrides gave his own prize
to his herald Talthybius—the king's burnished trophy.
The games were over now. The gathered armies scattered,
each man to his fast ship, and fighters turned their minds
to thoughts of food and the sweet warm grip of sleep.
But Achilles kept on grieving for his friend,
the memory burning on . . .
and all-subduing sleep could not take him,
not now, he turned and twisted, side to side,
he longed for Patroclus' manhood, his gallant heart—
What rough campaigns they'd fought to an end together,
what hardships they had suffered, cleaving their way
through wars of men and pounding waves at sea.
The memories flooded over him, live tears flowing,
and now he'd lie on his side, now flat on his back,
now facedown again. At last he'd leap to his feet,
wander in anguish, aimless along the surf, and dawn on dawn
flaming over the sea and shore would find him pacing.
Then he'd yoke his racing team, to the chariot-harness,
lash the corpse of Hector behind the car for dragging
and haul him three times round the dead Patroclus' tomb,
and then he'd rest again in his tents and leave the body
sprawled facedown in the dust. But Apollo pitied Hector—
dead man though he was—and warded all corruption off
from Hector's corpse and round him, head to foot,
the great god wrapped the golden shield of storm
so his skin would never rip as Achilles dragged him on.
And so he kept on raging, shaming noble Hector,
but the gods in bliss looked down and pitied Priam's son.
They kept on urging the sharp-eyed giant-killer Hermes
to go and steal the body, a plan that pleased them all,
but not Hera, Poseidon or the girl with blazing eyes.
They clung to their deathless hate of sacred Troy,
Priam and Priam's people, just as they had at first
when Paris in all his madness launched the war.
He offended Athena and Hera—both goddesses.
When they came to his shepherd's fold he favored Love
who dangled before his eyes the lust that loosed disaster.
But now, at the twelfth dawn since Hector's death,
lord Apollo rose and addressed the immortal powers:
"Hard-hearted you are, you gods, you live for cruelty!
Did Hector never bum in your honor thighs of oxen
and flawless, full-grown goats? Now you cannot
bring yourselves to save him—even his corpse—
so his wife can see him, his mother and his child,
his father Priam and Priam's people: how they'd rush
to burn his body on the pyre and give him royal rites!
But murderous Achilles—you gods, you choose to help Achilles.
That man without a shred of decency in his heart . . .
his temper can never bend and change—like some lion
going his own barbaric way, giving in to his power,
his brute force and wild pride, as down he swoops
on the flocks of men to seize his savage feast.
Achilles has lost all pity! No shame in the man,
shame that does great harm or drives men on to good.
No doubt some mortal has suffered a dearer loss than this,
a brother born in the same womb, or even a son . . .
he grieves, he weeps, but then his tears are through.
The Fates have given mortals hearts that can endure.
But this Achilles—first he slaughters Hector,
he rips away the noble prince's life
then lashes him to his chariot, drags him round
his beloved comrade's tomb. But why, I ask you?
What good will it do him? What honor will he gain?
Let that man beware, or great and glorious as he is,
we mighty gods will wheel on him in anger-look,
he outrages the senseless clay in all his fury!"
But white-armed Hera flared at him in anger:
"Yes, there'd be some merit even in what you say,
lord of the silver bow—if all you gods, in fact,
would set Achilles and Hector high in equal honor.
But Hector is mortal. He sucked a woman's breast.
Achilles sprang from a goddess-one I reared myself—
I brought her up and gave her in marriage to a man,
to Peleus, dearest to all your hearts, you gods.
All you gods, you shared in the wedding rites,
and so did you, Apollo—there you sat at the feast
and struck your lyre. What company you keep now,
these wretched Trojans. You-forever faithless!"
But Zeus who marshals the storm clouds warned his queen,
"Now, Hera, don't fly into such a rage at fellow gods.
These two can never attain the same degree of honor.
Still, the immortals loved Prince Hector dearly,
best of all the mortals born in Troy . . .
so I loved him, at least:
he never stinted with gifts to please my heart.
Never once did my altar lack its share of victims,
winecups tipped and the deep smoky savor. These,
these are the gifts we claim-they are our rights.
But as for stealing courageous Hector's body,
we must abandon the idea-not a chance in the world
behind Achilles' back. For Thetis is always there,
his mother always hovering near him night and day.
Now, would one of you gods call Thetis to my presence?—
so I can declare to her my solemn, sound decree:
Achilles must receive a ransom from King Priam,
Achilles must give Hector's body back."
So he decreed
and iris, racing a gale-wind down with Zeus's message,
mid-sea between Samos and Imbros' rugged cliffs
dove in a black swell as groaning breakers roared.
Down she plunged to the bottom fast as a lead weight
sheathed in a glinting lure of wild bull's horn,
bearing hooked death to the ravenous fish.
And deep in a hollow cave she came on Thetis.
Gathered round her sat the other immortal sea-nymphs
while Thetis amidst them mourned her brave son's fate,
doomed to die, she knew, on the fertile soil of Troy,
far from his native land. Quick as the wind now
Iris rushed to the goddess, urging, "Rise, Thetis—
Zeus with his everlasting counsels calls you now!"
Shifting on her glistening feet, the goddess answered,
"Why . . . what does the great god want with me?
I cringe from mingling with the immortals now—
Oh the torment—never-ending heartbreak!
But go I shall. A high decree of the Father
must not come to nothing—whatever he commands."
The radiant queen of sea-nymphs seized a veil,
blue-black, no robe darker in all the Ocean's depths,
and launched up and away with wind-swift Iris leading—
the ground swell round them cleaved and opened wide.
And striding out on shore they soared to the high sky
and found farseeing Zeus, and around him all the gods
who live in bliss forever sat in a grand assembly.
And Thetis took a seat beside the Father,
a throne Athena yielded. Hera placed in her hand
a burnished golden cup and said some words of comfort,
and taking a few quick sips, Thetis gave it back . . .
The father of men and gods began to address them:
"You have come to Olympus now, immortal Thetis,
for all your grief—what unforgettable sorrow
seizes on your heart. I know it well myself.
Even so, I must tell you why I called you here.
For nine whole days the immortals have been feuding
over Hector's corpse and Achilles scourge of cities.
They keep urging the sharp-eyed giant-killer Hermes
to go and steal the body. But that is not my way.
I will grant Achilles glory and so safeguard
your awe and love of me for all the years to come.
Go at once to the camp, give your son this order:
tell him the gods are angry with him now
and I am rising over them all in deathless wrath
that he in heartsick fury still holds Hector's body,
there by his beaked ships, and will not give him back—
perhaps in fear of me he'll give him back at once.
Then, at the same time, I am winging Iris down
to greathearted Priam, commanding the king
to ransom his dear son, to go to Achaea's ships,
bearing gifts to Achilles, gifts to melt his rage."
So he decreed
and Thetis with her glistening feet did not resist a moment.
Down the goddess flashed from the peaks of Mount Olympus,
made her way to her son's camp, and there he was,
she found him groaning hard, choked with sobs.
Around him trusted comrades swung to the work,
preparing breakfast, steadying in their midst
a large fleecy sheep just slaughtered in the shelter.
But his noble mother, settling down at his side,
stroked Achilles gently, whispering his name: "My child—
how long will you eat your heart out here in tears and torment?
All wiped from your mind, all thought of food and bed?
It's a welcome thing to make love with a woman . . .
You don't have long to live now, well I know:
already I see them looming up beside you—death
and the strong force of fate. Listen to me,
quickly! I bring you a ,message sent by Zeus:
he says the gods are angry with you now
and he is rising over them all in deathless wrath
that you in heartsick fury still.hold Hector's body,
here by your beaked ships, and will not give him back.
O give him back at once—take ransom for the dead!"
The swift runner replied in haste, "So be it.
The man who brings the ransom can take away the body,
if Olympian Zeus himself insists in all earnest."
While mother and son agreed among the clustered ships,
trading between each other many winged words,
Father Zeus sped Iris down to sacred Troy:
"Quick on your way now, Iris, shear the wind!
Leave our Olympian stronghold—
take a message to greathearted Priam down in Troy:
he must go to Achaea's ships and ransom his dear son,
bearing gifts to Achilles, gifts to melt his rage.
But let him go alone, no other Trojan attend him,
only a herald with him, a seasoned, older one
who can drive the mules and smooth-running wagon
and bring the hero's body back to sacred Troy,
the man that brilliant Achilles killed in battle.
Let him have no fear of death, no dread in his heart,
such a powerful escort we will send him-the giant-killer
Hermes will guide him all the way to Achilles' presence.
And once the god has led him within the fighter's shelter,
Achilles will not kill him—he'll hold back all the rest:
Achilles is no madman, no reckless fool, not the one
to defy the gods' commands. Whoever begs his mercy
he will spare with all the kindness in his heart."
So he decreed
and Iris ran his message, racing with gale force
to Priam's halls where cries and mourning met her.
Sons huddled round their father deep in the courtyard,
robes drenched with tears, and the old man amidst them,
buried, beaten down in the cloak that wrapped his body . . .
Smeared on the old man's head and neck the dung lay thick
that he scraped up in his own hands, groveling in the filth.
Throughout the house his daughters and sons' wives wailed,
remembering all the fine brave men who lay dead now,
their lives destroyed at the fighting Argives' hands.
And Iris, Zeus's crier, standing alongside Priam,
spoke in a soft voice, but his limbs shook at once—
"Courage, Dardan Priam, take heart! Nothing to fear.
No herald of doom, I come on a friendly mission—
I come with all good will.
I bring you a message sent by Zeus, a world away
but he has you in his heart, he pities you now . . .
Olympian Zeus commands you to ransom royal Hector,
to bear gifts to Achilles, gifts to melt his rage.
But you must go alone, no other Trojan attend you,
only a herald with you, a seasoned, older one
who can drive the mules and smooth-running wagon
and bring the hero's body back to sacred Troy,
the man that brilliant Achilles killed in battle.
But have no fear of death, no dread in your heart,
such a powerful escort will conduct you-the giant-killer
Hermes will guide you all the way to Achilles' presence.
And once the god has led you within the fighter's shelter,
Achilles will not kill you—he'll hold back all the rest:
Achilles is no madman, no reckless fool, not the one
to defy the gods' commands. Whoever begs his mercy
he will spare with all the kindness in his heart!"
And Iris racing the wind went veering off
and Priam ordered his sons to get a wagon ready,
a good smooth-running one, to hitch the mules
and strap a big wicker cradle across its frame.
Then down he went himself to his treasure-chamber,
high-ceilinged, paneled, fragrant with cedarwood
and a wealth of precious objects filled its chests.
He called out to his wife, Hecuba, "Dear womanl
An Olympian messenger came to me from Zeus—
I must go to Achaea's ships and ransom our dear son,
bearing gifts to Achilles, gifts to melt his rage.
Tell me, what should I do? What do you think?
Myself—a terrible longing drives me, heart and soul,
down to the ships, into the vast Achaean camp."
But his wife cried out in answer, "No, no—
where have your senses gone?—that made you famous once,
both among outland men and those you rule in Troy!
How can you think of going down to the ships, alone,
and face the glance of the man who killed your sons,
so many fine brave boys? You have a heart of iron!
If he gets you in his clutches, sets his eyes on you—
that savage, treacherous man-he'll show no mercy,
no respect for your rights!
Come, all we can do now
is sit in the halls, far from our son, and wail for Hector . . .
So this, this is the doom that strong Fate spun out,
our son's life line drawn with his first breath—
the moment I gave him birth—
to glut the wild dogs, cut off from his parents,
crushed by the stronger man. Oh would to god
that I could sink my teeth in his liver, eat him raw!
That would avenge what he has done to Hector—
no coward the man Achilles killed—my son stood
and fought for the men of Troy and their deep-breasted wives
with never a thought of flight or run for cover!"
But the old and noble Priam answered firmly,
"I will go. My mind's made up. Don't hold me back.
And don't go flying off on your own across the halls,
a bird of evil omen—you can't dissuade me now.
If someone else had commanded me, some mortal man,
some prophet staring into the smoke, some priest,
I'd call it a lie and turn my back upon it.
Not now. I heard her voice with my own ears,
I looked straight at the goddess, face-to-face.
So I am going—her message must not come to nothing.
And if it is my fate to die by the beaked ships
of Achaeans armed in bronze, then die I shall.
Let Achilles cut me down straightway—
once I've caught my son in my arms and wept my fill!"
He raised back the carved lids of the chests
and lifted out twelve robes, handsome, rich brocades,
twelve cloaks, unlined and light, as many blankets,
as many big white capes and shirts to go with them.
He weighed and carried out ten full bars of gold
and took two burnished tripods, four fine cauldrons
and last a magnificent cup the Thracians gave him once—
he'd gone on an embassy and won that priceless treasure—
but not even that did the old man spare in his halls,
not now, consumed with desire to ransom back his son.
Crowds of Trojans were mobbing his colonnades—
he gave them a tongue-lashing, sent them packing:
"Get out—you good-for-nothings, public disgraces!
Haven't you got enough to wail about at home
without coming here to add to all my griefs?
You think it nothing, the pain that Zeus has sent me?—
he's destroyed my best son! You'll learn too, in tears—
easier game you'll be for Argive troops to slaughter,
now my Hector's dead. But before I have to see
my city annihilated, laid waste before my eyes—
oh let me go down to the House of Death!"
He herded them off with his staff—they fled outside
before the old man's fury. So he lashed out at his sons,
cursing the sight of Helenus, Paris, noble Agathon,
Pammon, Antiphonus, Polites loud with the war cry,
Deiphobus and Hippothous, even lordly Dius—
the old man shouted at all nine, rough commands:
"Get to your work! My vicious sons—my humiliations!
If only you'd all been killed at the fast ships
instead of my dear Hector . . .
But I—dear god, my life so cursed by fate!—
I fathered hero sons in the wide realm of Troy
and. now, now not a single one is left, I, tell you.
Mestor the indestructible, Troilus, passionate horseman
and Hector, a god among men—no son of a mortal man,
he seemed a deathless god's. But Ares killed them all
and all he left me are these, these disgraces—liars,
dancers, heroes only at beating the dancing-rings,
you plunder your own people for lambs and kids!
Why don't you get my wagon ready—now, at once?
Pack all these things aboard! We must be on our way!"
Terrified by their father's rough commands
the sons trundled a mule-wagon out at once,
a good smooth-running one,
newly finished, balanced and bolted tight,
and strapped a big wicker cradle across its frame.
They lifted. off its hook a boxwood yoke for the mules,
its bulging pommel fitted with rings for guide-reins,
brought out with the yoke its yoke-strap nine arms long
and wedged the yoke down firm on the sanded, tapered pole,
on the front peg, and slipped the yoke-ring onto its pin,
strapped the pommel with three good twists, both sides,
then lashed the assembly round and down the shaft
and under the clamp they made the lashing fast.
Then the priceless ransom for Hector's body:
hauling it up from the vaults they piled it high
on the wagon's well-made cradle, then they yoked the mules—
stamping their sharp hoofs, trained for heavy loads—
that the Mysians once gave Priam, princely gifts.
And last they yoked his team to the king's chariot,
stallions he bred himself in his own polished stalls.
No sooner were both men harnessed up beneath the roofs,
Priam and herald, minds set on the coming journey,
than Hecuba rushed up to them, gaunt with grief,
her right hand holding a golden cup of honeyed wine
so the men might pour libations forth at parting.
She stood in front of the horses, crying up at Priam,
"Here, quickly—pour a libation out to Father Zeus!
Pray for a safe return from all our mortal enemies,
seeing you're dead set on going down to the ships—
though you go against my will. But if go you must,
pray, at least, to the great god of the dark storm cloud,
up there on Ida, gazing down on the whole expanse of Troy!
Pray for a bird of omen, Zeus's wind-swift messenger,
the dearest bird in the world to his prophetic heart,
the strongest thing on wings-clear on the right
so you can see that sign with your own eyes
and trust your life to it as you venture down
to Achaea's ships and the fast chariot-teams.
But if farseeing Zeus does not send you that sign—
his own messenger—then I urge you, beg you,
don't go down to the ships—
not for all the passion in your heart!"
The old majestic Priam gave his answer:
"Dear woman, surely I won't resist your urging now.
It's well to lift our hands and ask great Zeus for mercy."
And the old king motioned a steward standing by
to pour some clear pure water over his hands,
and she came forward, bearing a jug and basin.
He rinsed his hands, took the cup from his wife
and taking a stand amidst the forecourt, prayed,
pouring the wine to earth and scanning the high skies,
Priam prayed in his rich resounding voice: "Father Zeus!
Ruling over us all from Ida, god of greatness, god of glory! -
Grant that Achilles will receive me with kindness, mercy.
Send me a bird of omen, your own wind-swift messenger,
the dearest bird in the world to your prophetic heart,
the strongest thing on wings—clear on the right
so I can see that sign with my own eyes
and trust my life to it as I venture down
to Achaea's ships and the fast chariot-teams!"
And Zeus in all his wisdom heard that prayer
and straightaway the Father launched an eagle—
truest of Zeus's signs that fly the skies—
the dark marauder that mankind calls the Black-wing.
Broad as the door of a rich man's vaulted treasure-chamber,
well-fitted with sturdy bars, so broad each wing of the bird
spread out on either side as it swept in through the city
flashing clear on the right before the king and queen.
All looked up, overjoyed—the people's spirits lifted.
And the old man, rushing to climb aboard his chariot,
drove out through the gates and echoing colonnades.
The mules in the lead hauled out the four-wheeled wagon,
driven on by seasoned Idaeus. The horses came behind
as the old man cracked the lash and urged them fast
throughout the city with all his kinsmen trailing . . .
weeping their hearts out, as if he went to his death.
But once the two passed down through crowded streets
and out into open country, Priam's kin turned back,
his sons and in-laws straggling home to Troy.
But Zeus who beholds the world could hardly fail
to see the two men striking out across the plain.
As he watched the old man he filled with pity
and quickly summoned Hermes, his own dear son:
"Hermes—escorting men is your greatest joy,,
you above all the gods,
and you listen to the wish of those you favor.
So down you go. Down and conduct King Priam there
through Achaea's beaked ships, so none will see him,
none of the Argive fighters recognize him now,
not till he reaches Peleus' royal son."
So he decreed
and Hermes the giant-killing guide obeyed at once.
Under his feet he fastened the supple sandals,
never-dying gold, that wing him over the waves
and boundless earth with the rush of gusting winds.
He seized the wand that enchants the eyes of men
whenever Hermes wants, or wakes them up from sleep.
That wand in his grip he flew, the mighty giant-killer
touching down on Troy and the Hellespont in no time
and from there he went on foot, for all the world
like a young prince, sporting his first beard,
just in the prime and fresh warm pride of youth.
And now,
as soon as the two drove past the great tomb of Ilus
they drew rein at the ford to water mules and team.
A sudden darkness had swept across the earth
and Hermes was all but on them when the herald
looked up, saw him, shouted at once to Priam,
"Danger, my king—think fast! I see a man—
I'm afraid we'll both be butchered on the spot—
into the chariot, hurry! Run for our lives
or fling ourselves at his knees and beg for mercy!"
The old man was stunned, in a swirl of terror,
the hairs stood bristling all over his gnarled body—
he stood there, staring dumbly. Not waiting for welcome
the running god of luck went straight up to Priam,
clasped the old king's hands and asked him warmly,
"Father—where do you drive these mules and team
through the godsent night while other mortals sleep?
Have you no fear of the Argives breathing hate and fury?
Here are your deadly enemies, camping close at hand.
Now what if one of them saw you, rolling blithely on
through the rushing night with so much tempting treasure—
how would you feel then? You're not so young yourself,
and the man who attends you here is far too old
to drive off an attacker spoiling for a fight.
But I would never hurt you—and what's more,
I'd beat off any man who'd do you harm:
you remind me of my dear father, to the life."
And the old and noble Priam said at once,
"Our straits are hard, dear child, as you say.
But a god still holds his hands above me, even me.
Sending such a traveler here to meet me—
what a lucky omen! Look at your build . . .
your handsome face—a wonder. And such good sense—
your parents must be blissful as the gods!"
The guide and giant-killer answered quickly,
"You're right, old man, all straight to the mark.
But come, tell me the truth now, point by point:
this treasure—a king's ransom—do you send it off
to distant, outland men, to keep it safe for you?
Or now do you all abandon sacred Troy,
all in panic-such was the man who died,
your finest, bravest man . . . your own son
who never failed in a fight against the Argives."
But the old majestic Priam countered quickly,
"Who are you, my fine friend?—who are your parents?
How can you speak so well of my doomed son's fate?"
And the guide and giant-killer answered staunchly,
"You're testing me, old man—asking of noble Hector.
Ah, how often I watched him battling on the lines
where men win glory, saw the man with my own eyes!
And saw him drive Achaeans against the ships that day
he kept on killing, cutting them down with slashing bronze
while we stood by and marveled—Achilles reined us in:
no fighting for us while he raged on at Agamemnon.
I am Achilles' aide, you see,
one and the same good warship brought us here.
I am a Myrmidon, and my father is Polyctor,
and a wealthy man he is, about as old as you . . .
He has six sons—I'm the seventh—we all shook lots
and it fell to me to join the armies here at Troy.
I've just come up from the ships to scout the plain—
at dawn the fiery-eyed Achaeans fight around the city.
They chafe, sitting in camp, so bent on battle now
the kings of Achaea cannot hold them back."
And the old and noble Priam asked at once,
"If you really are the royal Achilles' aide,
please, tell me the whole truth, point by point.
My son—does he still lie by the beached ships,
or by now has the great Achilles hacked him
limb from limb and served him to his dogs?"
The guide and giant-killer reassured him:
"So far, old man, no birds or dogs have eaten him.
No, there he lies—still there at Achilles' ship,
still intact in his shelters.
This is the twelfth day he's lain there, too,
but his body has not decayed, not in the least,
nor have the worms begun to gnaw his corpse,
the swarms that devour men who fall in battle.
True, dawn on fiery dawn he drags him round
his beloved comrade's tomb, drags him ruthlessly
but he cannot mutilate his body. It's marvelous—
go see for yourself how he lies there fresh as dew,
the blood washed away, and no sign of corruption.
All his wounds sealed shut, wherever they struck . . .
and many drove their bronze blades through his body.
Such pains the blissful gods are lavishing on your son,
dead man though he is—the gods love him dearly!"
And the old man rejoiced at that, bursting out,
"O my child, how good it is to give the immortals
fit and proper gifts! Now take my son—
or was he all a dream? Never once in his halls
did he forget the gods who hold Olympus, never,
so now they remember him . . . if only after death.
Come, this handsome cup: accept it from me, I beg you!
Protect me, escort me now—if the gods will it so—
all the way till I reach Achilles' shelter."
The guide and giant-killer refused him firmly,
"You test me again, old man, since I am young,
but you will not persuade me,
tempting me with a gift behind Achilles' back.
I fear the man, I'd die of shame to rob him—
just think of the trouble I might suffer later.
But I'd escort you with all the kindness in my heart,
all the way till I reached the shining hills of Argos
bound in a scudding ship or pacing you on foot—
and no marauder on earth, scorning your escort,
would dare attack you then."
And the god of luck,
leaping onto the chariot right behind the team,
quickly grasped the whip and reins in his hands
and breathed fresh spirit into the mules and horses.
As they reached the trench and rampart round the, fleet,
the sentries had just begun to set out supper there
but the giant-killer plunged them all in sleep . . .
he spread the gates at once, slid back the bars
and ushered Priam in with his wagon-load of treasure.
Now, at last, they approached royal Achilles' shelter,
the tall, imposing lodge the Myrmidons built their king,
hewing planks of pine, and roofed it high with thatch,
gathering thick shaggy reeds from the meadow banks,
and round it built their king a spacious courtyard
fenced with close-set stakes. A single pine beam
held the gates, and it took three men to ram it home,
three to shoot the immense bolt back and spread the doors—
three average men. Achilles alone could ram it home himself.
But the god of luck now spread the gates for the old man,
drove in the glinting gifts for Peleus' swift son,
climbed down from behind the team and said to Priam,
"Old man, look, I am a god come down to you,
I am immortal Hermes—
my Father sent me here to be your escort.
But now I will hasten back. I will not venture
into Achilles' presence: it would offend us all
for a mortal man to host an immortal face-to-face.
But you go in yourself and clasp Achilles' knees,
implore him by his father, his mother with lovely hair,
by his own son-s-o you can stir his heart!"
With that urging
Hermes went his way to the steep heights of Olympus.
But Priam swung down to earth from the battle-car
and leaving Idaeus there to rein in mules and team,
the old king went straight up to the lodge
where Achilles dear to Zeus would always sit.
Priam found the warrior there inside . . .
many captains sitting some way off, but two,
veteran Automedon and the fine fighter Alcimus
were busy serving him. He had just finished dinner,
eating, drinking, and the table still stood near.
The majestic king of Troy slipped past the rest
and kneeling down beside Achilles, clasped his knees
and kissed his hands, those terrible, man-killing hands
that had slaughtered Priam's many sons in battle.
Awesome—as when the grip of madness seizes one
who murders a man in his own fatherland and, flees
abroad to foreign shores, to a wealthy, noble host,
and a sense of marvel runs through all who see him—
so Achilles marveled, beholding majestic Priam.
His men marveled too, trading startled glances.
But Priam prayed his heart out to Achilles:
"Remember your own father, great godlike Achilles—
as old as I am, past the threshold of deadly old age!
No doubt the countrymen round about him plague him now,
with no one there to defend him, beat away disaster.
No one-but at least he hears you're still alive
and his old heart rejoices, hopes rising, day by day,
to see his beloved son come sailing home from Troy.
But I—dear god, my life so cursed by fate . . .
I fathered hero sons in the wide realm of Troy
and now not a single one is left, I tell you.
Fifty sons I had when the sons of Achaea came,
nineteen born to me from a single mother's womb
and the rest by other women in the palace. Many,
most of them violent Ares cut the knees from under.
But one, one was left me, to guard my walls, my people—
the one you killed the other day, defending his fatherland,
my Hector! It's all for him I've come to the ships now,
to win him back from you-I bring a priceless ransom.
Revere the gods, Achilles! Pity me in my own right,
remember your own father! I deserve more pity . . .
I have endured what no one on earth has ever done before—
I put to my lips the hands of the man who killed my son."
Those words stirred within Achilles a deep desire
to grieve for his own father. Taking the old man's hand
he gently moved him back. And overpowered by memory
both men gave way to grief. Priam wept freely
for man-killing Hector, throbbing, crouching
before Achilles' feet as Achilles wept himself,
now for his father, now for Patroclus once again,
and their sobbing rose and fell throughout the house.
Then, when brilliant Achilles had had his fill of tears
and the longing for it had left his mind and body,
he rose from his seat, raised the old man by the hand
and filled with pity now for his gray head and gray beard,
he spoke out winging words, flying straight to the heart:
"Poor man, how much you've borne—pain to break the spirit!
What daring brought you down to the ships, all alone,
to face the glance of the man who killed your sons,
so many fine brave boys? You have a heart of iron.
Come, please, sit down on this chair here .. .
Let us put our griefs to rest in our own hearts,
rake them up no more, raw as we are with mourning.
What good's to be won from tears that chill the spirit?
So the immortals spun our lives that we, we wretched men
live on to bear such torments—the gods live free of sorrows.
There are two great jars that stand on the floor of Zeus's halls
and hold his gifts, our miseries one, the other blessings.
When Zeus who loves the lightning mixes gifts for a man,
now he meets with misfortune, now good times in turn.
When Zeus dispenses gifts from the jar of sorrows only,
he makes a man an outcast—brutal, ravenous hunger
drives him down the face of the shining earth,
stalking far and wide, cursed by gods and men.
So with my father, Peleus. What glittering gifts
the gods rained down from the day that he was born!
He excelled all men in wealth and pride of place,
he lorded the Myrmidons, and mortal that he was,
they gave the man an immortal goddess for a wife.
Yes, but even on him the Father piled hardships,
no powerful race of princes born in his royal halls,
only a single son he fathered, doomed at birth,
cut off in the spring of life—
and I, I give the man no care as he grows old
since here I sit in Troy, far from my fatherland,
a grief to you, a grief to all your children . . .
And you too, old man, we hear you prospered once:
as far as Lesbos, Macar's kingdom, bounds to seaward,
Phrygia east and upland, the Hellespont vast and north—
that entire realm, they say, you lorded over once,
you excelled all men, old king, in sons and wealth.
But then the gods of heaven brought this agony on you—
ceaseless battles round your walls, your armies slaughtered.
You must bear up now. Enough of endless tears,
the pain that breaks the spirit.
Grief for your son will do no good at all.
You will never bring him back to life—
sooner,you must suffer something worse."
But the old and noble Priam protested strongly:
"Don't 'make me sit on a chair, Achilles, Prince,
not while Hector lies uncared-for in your camp!
Give him back to me, now, no more delay—
I must see my son with my own eyes.
Accept the ransom I bring you, a king's ransom!
Enjoy it, all of it—return to your own native land,
safe and sound . . . since now you've spared my life."
A dark glance—and the headstrong runner answered,
"No more, old man, don't tempt my wrath, not now!
My own mind's made up to give you back your son.
A messenger brought me word from Zeus-my mother,
Thetis who bore me, the Old Man of the Sea's daughter.
And what's more, I can see through you, Priam—
no hiding the fact from me: one of the gods
has led you down to Achaea's fast ships.
No man alive, not even a rugged young fighter,
would dare to venture into our camp. Never—
how could he slip past the sentries unchallenged?
Or shoot back the bolt of my gates with so much ease?
So don't anger me now. Don't stir my raging heart still more.
Or under my own roof I may not spare your, life, old man—
suppliant that you are—may break the laws of Zeus!"
The old man was terrified. He obeyed the order.
But Achilles bounded out of doors like a lion—
not alone but flanked by his two aides-in-arms,
veteran Automedon and Alcimus, steady comrades,
Achilles' favorites next to the dead Patroclus.
They loosed from harness the horses and the mules,
they led the herald in, the old king's crier,
and sat him down on a bench. From the polished wagon
they lifted the priceless ransom brought for Hector's corpse
but they left behind two capes and a finely-woven shirt
to shroud the body well when Priam bore him home.
Then Achilles called the serving-women out:
"Bathe and anoint the body=
bear it aside first. Priam must not see his son."
He feared that, overwhelmed by the sight of Hector,
wild with grief, Priam might let his anger flare
and Achilles might fly into fresh rage himself,
cut the old man down and break the laws of Zeus.
So when the maids had bathed and anointed the body
sleek with olive oil and wrapped it round and round
in a braided battle-shirt and handsome battle-cape,
then Achilles lifted Hector up in his own arms
and laid him down on a bier, and comrades helped him
raise the bier and body onto the sturdy wagon . . .
Then with a groan he called his dear friend by name:
"Feel no anger at me, Patroclus, if you learn—
even there in the House of Death—I let his father
have Prince Hector back. He gave me worthy ransom
and you shall have your share from me, as always,
your fitting, lordly share."
So he vowed
and brilliant Achilles strode back to his shelter,
sat down on the well-carved chair that he had left,
at the far wall of the room, leaned toward Priam
and firmly spoke the words the king had come to hear:
"Your son is now set free, old man, as you requested.
Hector lies in state. With the first light of day
you will see for yourself as you convey him home.
Now, at last, let us turn our thoughts to supper.
Even Niobe with her lustrous hair remembered food,
though she saw a dozen children killed in her own halls,
six daughters and six sons in the pride and prime of youth.
True, lord Apollo killed the sons with his silver bow
and Artemis showering arrows killed the daughters.
Both gods were enraged at Niobe. Time and again
she placed herself on a par with their own mother,
Leto in her immortal beauty—how she insulted Leto:
'All you have borne is two, but I have borne so many!'
So, two as they were, they slaughtered all her children.
Nine days they lay in their blood, no one to bury them—
Cronus' son had turned the people into stone . . .
then on the tenth the gods of heaven interred them.
And Niobe, gaunt, worn to the bone with weeping,
turned her thoughts to food. And now, somewhere,
lost on the crags, on the lonely mountain slopes,
on Sipylus where, they say, the nymphs who live forever,
dancing along the Achelous River run to beds of rest—
there, struck into stone, Niobe still broods
on the spate of griefs the gods poured out to her.
So come—we too, old king, must think of food.
Later you can mourn your beloved son once more,
when you bear him home to Troy, and you'll weep many tears."
Never pausing, the swift runner sprang to his feet
and slaughtered a white sheep as comrades moved in
to skin the carcass quickly, dress the quarters well.
Expertly they cut the meat in pieces, pierced them with spits,
roasted them to a turn and pulled them off the fire.
Automedon brought the bread, set it out on the board
in ample wicker baskets. Achilles served the meat.
They reached out for the good things that lay at hand
and when they had put aside desire for food and drink,
Priam the son of Dardanus gazed at Achilles, marveling
now at the man's beauty, his magnificent build—
face-to-face he seemed a deathless god . . .
and Achilles gazed and marveled at Dardan Priam,
beholding his noble looks, listening to his words.
But once they'd had their fill of gazing at each other,
the old majestic Priam broke the silence first:
"Put me to bed quickly, Achilles, Prince.
Time to rest, to enjoy the sweet relief of sleep.
Not once have my eyes closed shut beneath my lids
from the day my son went down beneath your hands . . .
day and night I groan, brooding over the countless griefs,
groveling in the dung that fills my walled-in court.
But now, at long last, I have tasted food again
and let some glistening wine go down my throat.
Before this hour I had tasted nothing."
He shook his head
as Achilles briskly told his men and serving-women
to make beds in the porch's shelter, to lay down
some heavy purple throws for the beds themselves
and over them spread some blankets, thick woolly robes,
a warm covering laid on top. Torches in hand,
they left the hall and fell to work at once
and in no time two good beds were spread and made.
Then Achilles nodded to Priam, leading the king on
with brusque advice: "Sleep outside, old friend,
in case some Achaean captain comes to visit.
They keep on coming now, huddling beside me,
making plans for battle—it's their duty.
But if one saw you here in the rushing dark night
he'd tell Agamemnon straightaway, our good commander.
Then you'd have real delay in ransoming the body.
One more point. Tell me, be precise about it—
how many days do you need to bury Prince Hector?
I will hold back myself
and keep the Argive armies back that long."
And the old and noble Priam answered slowly,
"If you truly want me to give Prince Hector burial,
full, royal honors, you'd show me a great kindness,
Achilles, if you would do exactly as I say.
You know how crammed we are inside our city,
how far it is to the hills to haul in timber,
and our Trojans are afraid to make the journey.
Well, nine days we should mourn him in our halls,
on the tenth we'd bury Hector, hold the public feast,
on the eleventh build the barrow high above his body—
on the twelfth we'd fight again . . . if fight we must."
The swift runner Achilles reassured him quickly:
"All will be done, old Priam, as you command.
I will hold our attack as long as you require."
With that he clasped the old king by the wrist,
by the right hand, to free his heart from fear.
Then Priam and herald, minds set on the journey home,
bedded down for the night within the porch's shelter.
And deep in his sturdy well-built lodge Achilles slept
with Briseis in all her beauty sleeping by his side.
Now the great array of gods and chariot-driving men
slept all night long, overcome by gentle sleep.
But sleep could never hold the running Escort—
Hermes kept on turning it over in his mind . . .
how could he convoy Priam clear of the ships,
unseen by devoted guards who held the gates?
Hovering at his head the Escort rose and spoke:
"Not a care in the world, old man? Look at you,
how you sleep in the midst of men who'd kill you—
and just because Achilles spared your life. Now, yes,
you've ransomed your dear son—for a king's ransom.
But wouldn't the sons you left behind be forced
to pay three times as much for you alive?
What if Atrides Agamemnon learns you're here—
what if the whole Achaean army learns you're here?"
The old king woke in terror, roused the herald.
Hermes harnessed the mules and team. for both men,
drove them fast through the camp and no one saw them.
Once they reached the ford where the river runs clear,
the strong, whirling Xanthus sprung of immortal Zeus,
Hermes went his way to the steep heights of Olympus
as Dawn flung out her golden robe across the earth,
and the two men, weeping, groaning, drove the team
toward Troy and the mules brought on the body.
No one saw them at first, neither man nor woman,
none before Cassandra, golden as goddess Aphrodite.
She had climbed to Pergamus heights and from that point
she saw her beloved father swaying tall in the chariot,
flanked by the herald, whose cry could rouse the city.
And Cassandra saw him too . . .
drawn by the mules and stretched out on his bier.
She screamed and her scream rang out through all Troy:
"Come, look down, you men of Troy, you Trojan women!
Behold Hector now-if you ever once rejoiced
to see him striding home, home alive from battle!
He was the greatest joy of Troy and all our people!"
Her cries plunged Troy into uncontrollable grief
and not a man or woman was left inside the walls.
They streamed out at the gates to meet Priam
bringing in the body of the dead. Hector—
his loving wife and noble mother were first
to fling themselves on the wagon rolling on,
the first to tear their hair, embrace his head
and a wailing throng of people milled around them.
And now, all day long till the setting sun went down
they would have wept for Hector there before the gates
if the old man, steering the car, had not commanded,
"Let me through with the mules! Soon, in a moment,
you can have your fill of tears—once I've brought him home."
So he called and the crowds fell back on either side,
making way for the wagon. Once they had borne him
into the famous halls, they laid his body down
on his large carved bed and set beside him singers
to lead off the laments, and their voices rose in grief—
they lifted the dirge high as, the women wailed in answer.
And white-armed Andromache led their songs of sorrow,
cradling the head of Hector, man-killing Hector
gently in her arms: "0 my husband . . .
cut off from life so young! You leave me a widow,
lost in the royal halls-and the boy only a baby,
the son we bore together, you and I so doomed.
I cannot think he will ever come to manhood.
Long before that the city will be sacked,
plundered top to bottom! Because you are dead,
her great guardian, you who always defended Troy,
who kept her loyal wives and helpless children safe,
all who will soon be carried off in the hollow ships
and I with them—
And you, my child, will follow me
to labor, somewhere, at harsh, degrading work,
slaving under some heartless master's eye—that,
or some Achaean marauder will seize you by the arm
and hurl you headlong down from the ramparts—horrible death—
enraged at you because Hector once cut down his brother,
his father or his son, yes, hundreds of armed Achaeans
gnawed the dust of the world, crushed by Hector's hands!
Your father, remember, was no man of mercy . . .
not in the horror of battle, and that is why
the whole city of Troy mourns you now, my Hector—
you've brought your parents accursed tears and grief
but to me most of all you've left the horror, the heartbreak!
For you never died in bed and stretched your arms to me
or said some last word from the heart I can remember,
always, weeping for you through all my nights and days!"
Her voice rang out in tears and the women wailed in answer
and Hecuba led them now in a throbbing chant of sorrow:
"Hector, dearest to me by far of all my sons . . .
and dear to the gods while we still shared this life—
and they cared about you still, I see, even after death.
Many the sons I had whom the swift runner Achilles
caught and shipped on the barren salt sea as slaves
to Samos, to Imbros, to Lemnos shrouded deep in mist!
But you, once he slashed away your life with his brazen spear
he dragged you time and again around his comrade's tomb,
Patroclus whom you killed—not that he brought Patroclus
back to life by that. But I have you with me now . . .
fresh as the morning dew you lie in the royal halls
like one whom Apollo, lord of the silver bow,
has approached and shot to death with gentle shafts."
Her voice rang out in tears and an endless wail rose up
and Helen, the third in turn, led their songs of sorrow:
"Hector! Dearest to me of all my husband's brothers—
my husband, Paris, magnificent as a god . . .
he was the one who brought me here to Troy—
Oh how I wish I'd died before that day!
But this, now, is the twentieth year for me
since I sailed here and forsook my own native land,
yet never once did I hear from you a taunt, an insult.
But if someone else in the royal halls would curse me,
one of your brothers or sisters or brothers' wives
trailing their long robes, even your own mother—
not your father, always kind as my own father—
why, you'd restrain them with words, Hector,
you'd win them to my side . . .
you with your gentle temper, all your gentle words.
And so in the same breath I mourn for you and me,
my doom-struck, harrowed heart! Now there is no one left
in the wide realm of Troy, no friend to treat me kindly—
all the countrymen cringe from me in loathing!"
Her voice rang out in tears and vast throngs wailed
and old King Priam rose and gave his people orders:
"Now, you men of Troy, haul timber into the city!
Have no fear of an Argive ambush packed with danger—
Achilles vowed, when he sent me home from the black ships,
not to do us harm till the twelfth dawn arrives."
At his command they harnessed oxen and mules to wagons,
they assembled before the city walls with all good speed
and for nine days hauled in a boundless store of timber.
But when the tenth Dawn brought light to the mortal world
they carried gallant Hector forth, weeping tears,
and they placed his corpse aloft the pyre's crest,
flung a torch and set it all aflame.
At last,
when young Dawn with her rose-red fingers shone once more,
the people massed around illustrious Hector's pyre . . .
And once they'd gathered, crowding the meeting grounds,
they first put out the fires with glistening wine,
wherever the flames still burned in all their fury.
Then they collected the white bones of Hector—
all his brothers, his friends-in-arms, mourning,
and warm tears came streaming down their cheeks.
They placed the bones they found in a golden chest,
shrouding them round and round in soft purple cloths.
They quickly lowered the chest in a deep, hollow grave
and over it piled a copee of huge stones closely set,
then hastily heaped a barrow, posted lookouts all around
for fear the Achaean combat troops would launch their attack
before the time agreed. And once they'd heaped the mound
they turned back home to Troy, and gathering once again
they shared a splendid funeral feast in Hector's honor,
held in the house of Priam, king by will of Zeus.
And so the Trojans buried Hector breaker of horses.
Ithaca at Last 
His tale was over now. The Phaeacians all fell silent, hushed, 
his story holding them spellbound down the shadowed halls 
until Alcinous found the poise to say, "Odysseus, 
now that you have come to my bronze-floored house, 
my vaulted roofs, 1 know you won't be driven 
off your course, nothing can hold you back — 
however much you've suffered, you'll sail home. 
Here, friends, here's a command for one and all, 
you who frequent my palace day and night and drink 
the shining wine of kings and enjoy the harper's songs. 
The robes and hammered gold and a haul of other gifts 
you lords of our island council brought our guest — 
all lie packed in his polished sea-chest now. Come, 
each of us add a sumptuous tripod, add a cauldron! 
Then recover our costs with levies on the people: 
it's hard to afford such bounty man by man. " 
The king's instructions met with warm applause 
and home they went to sleep, each in his own house. 
When young Dawn with her rose-red fingers shone once more 
they hurried down to the ship with handsome bronze gifts, 
and striding along the decks, the ardent King Alcinous 
stowed them under the benches, shipshape, so nothing 
could foul the crewmen tugging at their oars. 
Then back the party went to Alcinous' house 
and shared a royal feast. 
The majestic king 
slaughtered an ox for them to Cronus' mighty son, 
Zeus of the thundercloud, whose power rules the world. 
They burned the thighs and fell to the lordly banquet, 
reveling there, while in their midst the inspired bard 
struck up a song, Demodocus, prized by all the people. 
True, but time and again Odysseus turned his face 
toward the radiant sun, anxious for it to set, 
yearning now to be gone and home once more ... 
As a man aches for his evening meal when all day long 
his brace of wine-dark oxen have dragged the bolted plowshare 
down a fallow field — how welcome the setting sun to him, 
the going home to supper, yes, though his knees buckle, 
struggling home at last. So welcome now to Odysseus 
the setting light of day, and he lost no time 
as he pressed Phaeacia's men who love their oars, 
addressing his host, Alcinous, first and foremost: 
"Alcinous, majesty, shining among your island people, 
make your libations, launch me safely on my way — 
to one and all, farewell! 
All is now made good, my heart's desire, 
your convoy home, your precious, loving gifts, 
and may the gods of Olympus bless them for me! 
May 1 find an unswerving wife when 1 reach home, 
and loved ones hale, unharmed! And you, my friends 
remaining here in your kingdom now, may you delight 
in your loyal wives and children! May the gods 
rain down all kinds of fortune on your lives, 
misfortune never harbor in your homeland!" 
All burst into applause, urging passage home 
for their parting guest, his farewell rang so true. 
Hallowed King Alcinous briskly called his herald: 
"Come, Pontonous! Mix the wine in the bowl, 
pour rounds to all our banqueters in the house, 
so we, with a prayer to mighty Zeus the Father, 
can sail our new friend home to native land." 
Pontonous mixed the heady, honeyed wine 
and hovering closely, poured full rounds for all. 
And from where they sat they tipped libations out 
to the happy gods who rule the vaulting skies. 
Then King Odysseus rose up from his seat 
and placing his two-eared cup in Arete 's hands, 
addressed the queen with parting wishes on the wing: 
"Your health, my queen, through all your days to come — 
until old age and death, that visit all mankind, 
pay you a visit too. Now 1 am on my way, 
but you, may you take joy in this house of yours, 
in your children, your people, in Alcinous the king!" 
With that the great Odysseus strode across the threshold. 
And King Alcinous sent the herald off with the guest 
to lead him down to the swift ship and foaming surf. 
And Arete sent her serving-women, one to carry 
a sea-cloak, washed and fresh, a shirt as well, 
another assigned to bear the sturdy chest 
and a third to take the bread and ruddy wine. 
When they reached the ship at the water's edge 
the royal escorts took charge of the gifts at once 
and stores of food and wine, stowed them deep in the holds, 
and then for their guest they spread out rug and sheets 
on the half -deck, clear astern on the ship's hull 
so he might sleep there soundly, undisturbed. 
And last, Odysseus climbed aboard himself 
and down he lay, all quiet, 
as crewmen sat to the oarlocks, each in line. 
They slipped the cable free of the drilled stone post 
and soon as they swung back and the blades tossed up the spray 
an irresistible sleep fell deeply on his eyes, the sweetest, 
soundest oblivion, still as the sleep of death itself ... 
And the ship like a four-horse team careering down the plain, 
all breaking as one with the whiplash cracking smartly, 
leaping with hoofs high to run the course in no time — 
so the stern hove high and plunged with the seething rollers 
crashing dark in her wake as on she surged unwavering, 
never flagging, no, not even a darting hawk, 
the quickest thing on wings, could keep her pace 
as on she ran, cutting the swells at top speed, 
bearing a man equipped with the gods' own wisdom, 
one who had suffered twenty years of torment, sick at heart, 
cleaving his way through wars of men and pounding waves at sea 
but now he slept in peace, the memory of his struggles 
laid to rest. 
And then, that hour the star rose up, 
the clearest, brightest star, that always heralds 
the newborn light of day, the deep-sea-going ship 
made landfall on the island ... Ithaca, at last. 
There on the coast a haven lies, named for Phorcys, 
the old god of the deep — with two jutting headlands, 
sheared off at the seaward side but shelving toward the bay, 
that break the great waves whipped by the gales outside 
so within the harbor ships can ride unmoored 
whenever they come in mooring range of shore. 
At the harbor's head a branching olive stands 
with a welcome cave nearby it, dank with sea-mist, 
sacred to nymphs of the springs we call the Naiads. 
There are mixing-bowls inside and double-handled jars, 
crafted of stone, and bees store up their honey in the hollows. 
There are long stone looms as well, where the nymphs weave out 
their webs from clouds of sea-blue wool — a marvelous sight — 
and a wellspring flows forever. The cave has two ways in, 
one facing the North Wind, a pathway down for mortals; 
the other, facing the South, belongs to the gods, 
no man may go that way ... 
it is the path for all the deathless powers. 
Here at this bay the Phaeacian crew put in — 
they 'd known it long before — driving the ship so hard 
she ran up onto the beach for a good half her length, 
such way the oarsmen's brawny arms had made. 
Up from the benches, swinging down to land, 
first they lifted Odysseus off the decks — 
linen and lustrous carpet too — and laid him 
down on the sand asleep, still dead to the world, 
then hoisted out the treasures proud Phaeacians, 
urged by open-hearted Pallas, had lavished on him, 
setting out for home. They heaped them all 
by the olive's trunk, in a neat pile, clear 
of the road for fear some passerby might spot 
and steal Odysseus' hoard before he could awaken. 
Then pushing off, they pulled for home themselves. 
But now Poseidon, god of the earthquake, never once 
forgetting the first threats he leveled at the hero, 
probed almighty Zeus to learn his plans in full: 
"Zeus, Father, 1 will lose all my honor now 
among the immortals, now there are mortal men 
who show me no respect — Phaeacians, too, 
born of my own loins! 1 said myself 
that Odysseus would suffer long and hard 
before he made it home, but 1 never dreamed 
of blocking his return, not absolutely at least, 
once youhadi pledged your word and bowed your head. 
But now they've swept him across the sea in their swift ship, 
they've set him down in Ithaca, sound asleep, and loaded the man 
with boundless gifts — bronze and hoards of gold and robes — 
aye, more plunder than he could ever have won from Troy 
if Odysseus had returned intact with his fair share!" 
"Incredible, " Zeus who marshals the thunderheads replied. 
"Earth-shaker, you with your massive power, why moaning so? 
The gods don't disrespect you. What a stir there'd be 
if they flung abuse at the oldest, noblest of them all. 
Those mortals? If any man, so lost in his strength 
and prowess, pays you no respect— just pay him back. 
The power is always yours. 
Do what you like. Whatever warms your heart." 
"King of the dark cloud," the earthquake god agreed, 
"I'd like to avenge myself at once, as you advise, 
but I've always feared your wrath and shied away. 
But now I'll crush that fine Phaeacian cutter 
out on the misty sea, now on her homeward run 
from the latest convoy. They will learn at last 
to cease and desist from escorting every man alive — 
I'll pile a huge mountain round about their port!" 
"Wait, dear brother," Zeus who collects the clouds 
had second thoughts. "Here's what seems best to me. 
As the people all lean down from the city heights 
to watch her speeding home, strike her into a rock 
that looks like a racing vessel, just offshore — 
amaze all men with a marvel for the ages. 
Then pile your huge mountain round about their port." 
Hearing ^Aa^ from Zeus, the god of the earthquake 
sped to Scheria now, the Phaeacians' island home, 
and waited there till the ship came sweeping in, 
scudding lightly along — and surging close abreast, 
the earthquake god with one flat stroke of his hand 
struck her to stone, rooted her to the ocean floor 
and made for open sea. 
The Phaeacians, aghast, 
those lords of the long oars, the master mariners 
traded startled glances, sudden outcries: 
"Look — who's pinned our swift ship to the sea?" 
"Just racing for home!" 
"Just hove into plain view!" 
They might well wonder, blind to what had happened, 
till Alcinous rose and made things all too clear: 
"Oh no — my father's prophecy years ago ... 
it all comes home to me with a vengeance now! 
He'd say Poseidon was vexed with us because 
we escorted all mankind and never came to grief. 
He said that one day, as a well-built ship of ours 
sailed home on the misty sea from such a convoy, 
the god would crush it, yes, 
and pile a huge mountain round about our port. 
So the old king foretold. Now, look, it all comes true! 
Hurry, friends, do as 1 say, let us all comply: 
stop our convoys home for every castaway 
chancing on our city! As for Poseidon, 
sacrifice twelve bulls to the god at once — 
the pick of the herds. Perhaps he'll pity us, 
pile no looming mountain ridge around our port." 
The people, terrified, prepared the bulls at once. 
So all of Phaeacia's island lords and captains, 
milling round the altar, lifted prayers 
to Poseidon, master of the sea ... 
That very moment 
great Odysseus woke from sleep on native ground at last — 
he'd been away for years — but failed to know the land, 
for the goddess Pallas Athena, Zeus's daughter, 
showered mist over all, so under cover 
she might change his appearance head to foot 
as she told him every peril he'd meet at home — 
keep him from being known by wife, townsmen, friends, 
till the suitors paid the price for all their outrage. 
And so to the king himself all Ithaca looked strange ... 
the winding beaten paths, the coves where ships can ride, 
the steep rock face of the cliffs and the tall leafy trees. 
He sprang to his feet and, scanning his own native country, 
groaned, slapped his thighs with his flat palms 
and Odysseus cried in anguish: 
"Man of misery, whose land have 1 lit on now? 
What arfthey here — violent, savage, lawless? 
or friendly to strangers, god-fearing men? 
Where can 1 take this heap of treasure now 
and where in the world do 1 wander off myself? 
If only the trove had stayed among the Phaeacians there 
and 1 had made my way to some other mighty king 
who would have hosted me well and sent me home! 
But now 1 don't know where to stow all this, 
and 1 can't leave it here, inviting any bandit 
to rob me blind. 
So damn those lords and captains, 
those Phaeacians! Not entirely honest or upright, were they? 
Sweeping me off to this, this no-man's-land, and they, 
they swore they'd sail me home to sunny Ithaca — ^well, 
they never kept their word. Zeus of the Suppliants 
pay them back — he keeps an eye on the world of men 
and punishes all transgressors! 
Come, quickly, 
I'll inspect my treasure and count it up myself. 
Did they make off with anything in their ship?" 
With that he counted up the gorgeous tripods, 
cauldrons, bars of gold and the lovely woven robes. 
Not a stitch was missing from the lot. But still 
he wept for his native country, trailing down the shore 
where the wash of sea on shingle ebbs and flows, 
his homesick heart in turmoil. 
But now Athena appeared and came toward him. 
She looked like a young man ... a shepherd boy 
yet elegant too, with all the gifts that grace the sons of kings, 
with a well-cut cloak falling in folds across her shoulders, 
sandals under her shining feet, a hunting spear in hand. 
Odysseus, overjoyed at the sight, went up to meet her, 
joining her now with salutations on the wing: 
"Greetings, friend! Since you are the first 
I've come on in this harbor, treat me kindly — 
no cruelty, please. Save these treasures, 
save me too. 1 pray to you like a god, 
1 fall before your knees and ask your mercy! 
And tell me this for a fact — 1 need to know — 
where on earth am I? what land? who lives here? 
Is it one of the sunny islands or some jutting shore 
of the good green mainland slanting down to sea?" 
Athena answered, her eyes brightening now, 
"You must be a fool, stranger, or come from nowhere, 
if you really have to ask what land this is. 
Trust me, it's not so nameless after all. 
It's known the world around, 
to all who live to the east and rising sun 
and to all who face the western mists and darkness. 
It's a rugged land, too cramped for driving horses, 
but though it's far from broad, it's hardly poor. 
There's plenty of grain for bread, grapes for wine, 
the rains never fail and the dewf all's healthy. 
Good country for goats, good for cattle too — 
there's stand on stand of timber 
and water runs in streambeds through the year. 
So, 
stranger, the name of Ithaca's reached as far as Troy, 
and Troy, they say, is a long hard sail from Greece." 
Ithaca... Heart racing, Odysseus that great exile 
filled with joy to hear Athena, daughter of storming Zeus, 
pronounce that name. He stood on native ground at last 
and he replied with a winging word to Pallas, 
not with a word of truth — he choked it back, 
always invoking the cunning in his heart: 
"Ithaca ... yes, I seem to have heard of Ithaca, 
even on Crete's broad island far across the sea. 
and now I've reached it myself, with all this loot, 
but 1 left behind an equal measure for my children. 
I'm a fugitive now, you see. 1 killed Idomeneus' son, 
Orsilochus, lightning on his legs, a man who beat 
all runners alive on that long island — what a racer! 
He tried to rob me of all the spoil I'd won at Troy, 
the plunder 1 went to hell and back to capture, true, 
cleaving my way through wars of men and waves at sea — 
and just because 1 refused to please his father, 
serve under him at Troy. 1 led my own command. 
So now with a friend 1 lay in wait by the road, 
1 killed him just loping in from the fields — 
with one quick stroke of my bronze spear 
in the dead of night, the heavens pitch-black ... 
no one could see us, spot me tearing out his life 
with a weapon honed for action. Once I'd cut him down 
1 made for a ship and begged the Phoenician crew for mercy, 
paying those decent hands a hearty share of plunder — 
asked them to take me on and land me down in Pylos, 
there or lovely Elis, where Epeans rule in power. 
But a heavy galewind blew them way off course, 
much against their will — 
they'd no desire to cheat me. Driven afar, 
we reached this island here at the midnight hour, 
rowing for dear life, we made it into your harbor — 
not a thought of supper, much as we all craved food, 
we dropped from the decks and lay down, just like that! 
A welcome sleep came over my weary bones at once, 
while the crew hoisted up my loot from the holds 
and set it down on the sand near where 1 slept. 
They reembarked, now homeward bound for Sidon, 
their own noble city, leaving me here behind, 
homesick in my heart ..." 
As his story ended, 
goddess Athena, gray eyes gleaming, broke into a smile 
and stroked him with her hand, and now she appeared a woman 
beautiful, tall and skilled at weaving lovely things. 
Her words went flying straight toward Odysseus: 
"Any man — any god who met you — would have to be 
some champion lying cheat to get past you 
for all-round craft and guile! You terrible man, 
foxy, ingenious, never tired of twists and tricks — 
so, not even here, on native soil, would you give up 
those wily tales that warm the cockles of your heart! 
Come, enough of this now. We're both old hands 
at the arts of intrigue. Here among mortal men 
you're far the best at tactics, spinning yarns, 
and 1 am famous among the gods for wisdom, 
cunning wiles, too. 
Ah, but you never recognized me, did you? 
Pallas Athena, daughter of Zeus — who always 
stands beside you, shields you in every exploit: 
thanks to me the Phaeacians all embraced you warmly. 
And now 1 am here once more, to weave a scheme with you 
and to hide the treasure-trove Phaeacia's nobles 
lavished on you then — 1 willed it, planned it so 
when you set out for home — and to tell you all 
the trials you must suffer in your palace ... 
Endure them all. You must. You have no choice. 
And to no one — no man, no woman, not a soul — 
reveal that you are the wanderer home at last. 
No, in silence you must bear a world of pain, 
subject yourself to the cruel abuse of men." 
"Ah goddess," the cool tactician countered, 
"you're so hard for a mortal man to know on sight, 
however shrewd he is — ^the shapes you take are endless! 
But 1 do know this: you were kind to me in the war years, 
so long as we men of Achaea soldiered on at Troy. 
But once we'd sacked King Priam's craggy city, 
boarded ship, and a god dispersed the fleet, 
from then on, daughter of Zeus, 1 never saw you, 
never glimpsed you striding along my decks 
to ward off some disaster. No, 1 wandered on, 
my heart forever torn to pieces inside my chest 
till the gods released me from my miseries at last, 
that day in the fertile kingdom of Phaeacia when 
you cheered me with words, in person, led me to their city. 
But now 1 beg you by your almighty Father's name ... 
for 1 can't believe I've reached my sunny Ithaca, 
1 must be roaming around one more exotic land — 
you're mocking me, 1 know it, telling me tales 
to make me lose my way. Tell me the truth now, 
have 1 really reached the land 1 love?" 
"Always the same, your wary turn of mind," 
Athena exclaimed, her glances flashing warmly. 
"That's why 1 can't forsake you in your troubles — 
you are so winning, so worldly-wise, so self-possessed! 
Anyone else, come back from wandering long and hard, 
would have hurried home at once, delighted to see 
his children and his wife. Oh, but not you, 
it's not your pleasure to probe for news of them — 
you must put your wife to the proof yourself! 
But she, she waits in your halls, as always, 
her life an endless hardship ... 
wasting away the nights, weeping away the days. 
1 never had doubts myself, no, 1 knew down deep 
that you would return at last, with all your shipmates lost. 
But 1 could not bring myself to fight my Father's brother, 
Poseidon, quaking with anger at you, still enraged 
because you blinded the Cyclops, his dear son. 
But come, let me show you Ithaca's setting, 
I'll convince you. This haven — look around — 
it's named for Phorcy s, the old god of the deep, 
and here at the harbor's head the branching olive stands 
with the welcome cave nearby it, dank with sea-mist, 
sacred to nymphs of the springs we call the Naiads. 
Here, under its arching vault, time and again 
you'd offer the nymphs a generous sacrifice 
to bring success! And the slopes above you, look. 
Mount Neriton decked in forests!" 
At those words 
the goddess scattered the mist and the country stood out clear 
and the great man who had borne so much rejoiced at last, 
thrilled to see his Ithaca — kissed the good green earth 
and raised his hands to the nymphs and prayed at once, 
"Nymphs of the springs, Naiads, daughters of Zeus, 
1 never dreamed 1 would see you yet again ... 
Now rejoice in my loving prayers — and later, 
just like the old days, 1 will give you gifts 
if Athena, Zeus 's daughter. Queen of Armies 
comes to my rescue, grants this fighter life 
and brings my son to manhood!" 
"Courage!"— 
goddess Athena answered, eyes afire — 
"Free your mind of all that anguish now. 
Come, quick, let's bury your treasures here 
in some recess of this haunted hallowed cave 
where they 'll be safe and sound, 
then we'll make plans so we can win the day." 
With that 
the goddess swept into the cavern's shadowed vault, 
searching for hiding-places far inside its depths 
while Odysseus hauled his treasures closer up, 
the gold, durable bronze and finespun robes, 
the Phaeacians' parting gifts. 
Once he'd stowed them well away, the goddess, 
Pallas Athena, daughter of storming Zeus, 
sealed the mouth of the cavern with a stone. 
Then down they sat by the sacred olive's trunk 
to plot the death of the high and mighty suitors. 
The bright-eyed goddess Athena led the way: 
"Royal son of Laertes, Odysseus, old campaigner, 
think how to lay your hands on all those brazen suitors, 
lording it over your house now, three whole years, 
courting your noble wife, offering gifts to win her. 
But she, forever broken-hearted for your return, 
builds up each man's hopes — 
dangling promises, dropping hints to each — 
but all the while with something else in mind. " 
"God help me!" the man of intrigue broke out: 
"Clearly I might have died the same ignoble death 
as Agamemnon, bled white in my own house too, 
if you had never revealed this to me now, 
goddess, blow-by-blow. 
Come, weave us a scheme so 1 can pay them back! 
You stand beside me, fire me with daring, fierce 
as the day we ripped Troy 's glittering crown of towers down. 
Stand by me — furious now as then, my bright-eyed one — 
and 1 would fight three hundred men, great goddess, 
with you to brace me, comrade-in-arms in battle!" 
Gray eyes ablaze, the goddess urged him on: 
"Surely I'll stand beside you, not forget you, 
not when the day arrives for us to do our work. 
Those men who court your wife and waste your goods? 
1 have a feeling some will splatter your ample floors 
with all their blood and brains. Up now, quickly. 
First 1 will transform you — no one must know you. 
1 will shrivel the supple skin on your lithe limbs, 
strip the russet curls from your head and deck you out 
in rags you'd hate to see some other mortal wear; 
I'll dim the fire in your eyes, so shining once — 
until you seem appalling to all those suitors, 
even your wife and son you left behind at home. 
But you, you make your way to the swineherd first, 
in charge of your pigs, and true to you as always, 
loyal friend to your son, to Penelope, so self-possessed. 
You'll find him posted beside his swine, grubbing round 
by Raven's Rock and the spring called Arethusa, 
rooting for feed that makes pigs sleek and fat, 
the nuts they love, the dark pools they drink. 
Wait there, sit with him, ask him all he knows. 
I'm off to Sparta, where the women are a wonder, 
to call Telemachus home, your own dear son, Odysseus. 
He's journeyed to Lacedaemon's rolling hills 
to see Menelaus, questing for news of you, 
hoping to learn if you are still alive." 
Shrewd Odysseus answered her at once: 
"Why not tell him the truth? You know it all. 
Or is he too — like father, like son — condemned 
to hardship, roving over the barren salt sea 
while strangers devour our livelihood right here?" 
But the bright-eyed goddess reassured him firmly: 
"No need for anguish, trust me, not for AJw — 
1 escorted your son myself 
so he might make his name by sailing there. 
Nor is he saddled down with any troubles now. 
He sits at ease in the halls of Menelaus, 
bathed in endless bounty ... True enough, 
some young lords in a black cutter lurk in ambush, 
poised to kill the prince before he reaches home, 
but 1 have my doubts they will. Sooner the earth 
will swallow down a few of those young gallants 
who eat you out of house and home these days!" 
No more words, not now — 
Athena stroked Odysseus with her wand. 
She shriveled the supple skin on his lithe limbs, 
stripped the russet curls from his head, covered his body 
top to toe with the wrinkled hide of an old man 
and dimmed the fire in his eyes, so shining once. 
She turned his shirt and cloak into squalid rags, 
ripped and filthy, smeared with grime and soot. 
She flung over this the long pelt of a bounding deer, 
rubbed bare, and gave him a staff and beggar's sack, 
torn and tattered, slung from a fraying rope. 
All plans made, 
they went their separate ways — ^Athena setting off 
to bring Telemachus home from hallowed Lacedaemon. 
The Loyal 
Swineherd 
So up from the haven now Odysseus climbed a rugged path 
through timber along high ground — ^Athena had shown the wag — 
to reach the swineherd's place, that fine loyal man 
who of all the household hands Odysseus ever had 
cared the most for his master's worldly goods. 
Sitting at the door of his lodge he found him, 
there in his farmstead, high-walled, broad and large, 
with its long view on its cleared rise of ground ... 
The swineherd made those walls with his own hands 
to enclose the pigs of his master gone for years. 
Alone, apart from his queen or old Laertes, 
he'd built them up of quarried blocks of stone 
and coped them well with a fence of wild pear. 
Outside he'd driven stakes in a long-line stockade, 
a ring of thickset palings split from an oak's dark heart. 
Within the yard he'd built twelve sties, side-by -side, 
to bed his pigs, and in each one fifty brood-sows 
slept aground, penned and kept for breeding. 
The boars slept outside, but far fewer of them, 
thanks to the lordly suitors' feasts that kept on 
thinning the herd and kept the swineherd stepping, 
sending to town each day the best fat hog in sight. 
By now they were down to three hundred and sixty head. 
But guarding them all the time were dogs like savage beasts, 
a pack of four, reared by the swineherd, foreman of men. 
The man himself was fitting sandals to his feet, 
carving away at an oxhide, dark and supple. 
As for his men, three were off with their pigs, 
herding them here or there. Under orders he'd sent 
a fourth to town, with hog in tow for the gorging suitors 
to slaughter off and glut themselves with pork. 
Suddenly — those snarling dogs spotted Odysseus, 
charged him fast — a shatter of barks — but Odysseus 
sank to the ground at once, he knew the trick: 
the staff dropped from his hand but here and now, 
on his own farm, he might have taken a shameful mauling. 
Yes, but the swineherd, quick to move, dashed for the gate, 
flinging his oxhide down, rushed the dogs with curses, 
scattered them left and right with flying rocks 
and warned his master, "Lucky to be alive, old man — 
a moment more, my pack would have torn you limb from limb! 
Then you'd have covered me with shame. As if the gods 
had never given me blows and groans aplenty ... 
Here 1 sit, my heart aching, broken for him, 
my master, my great king — fattening up 
his own hogs for other men to eat, while he, 
starving for food, 1 wager, wanders the earth, 
a beggar adrift in strangers' cities, foreign-speaking lands, 
if he's still alive, that is, still sees the rising sun. 
Come, follow me into my place, old man, so you. 
at least, can eat your fill of bread and wine. 
Then you can tell me where you're from 
and all the pains you've weathered." 
On that note 
the loyal swineherd led the way to his shelter, 
showed his guest inside and sat Odysseus down 
on brush and twigs he piled up for the visitor, 
flinging over these the skin of a shaggy wild goat, 
broad and soft, the swineherd's own good bedding. 
The king, delighted to be so well received, 
thanked the man at once: "My host — may Zeus 
and the other gods give you x^our heart's desire 
for the royal welcome you have shown me here!" 
And you replied, Eumaeus, loyal swineherd, 
"It's wrong, my friend, to send any stranger packing — 
even one who arrives in worse shape than you. 
Every stranger and beggar comes from Zeus 
and whatever scrap they get from the likes of us, 
they'll find it welcome. That's the best we can do, 
we servants, always cowed by our high and mighty masters, 
especially our young lords ... But my old master? 
The gods, they must have blocked his journey home. 
He'd have treated me well, he would, with a house, 
a plot of land and a wife you'd gladly prize. 
Goods that a kind lord will give a household hand 
who labors for him, hard, whose work the gods have sped, 
just as they speed the work 1 labor at all day. 
My master, 1 tell you, would have repaid me well 
if he'd grown old right here. But now he's dead ... 
If only Helen and all her kind had died out too, 
brought to her knees, just as she cut the legs 
from under troops of men! My king among them, 
went off to the stallion-land of Troy 
to fight the Trojans, save Agamemnon's honor!" 
Enough — 
he brusquely cinched his belt around his shirt, 
strode out to the pens, crammed with droves of pigs. 
picked out two, bundled them in and slaughtered both, 
singed them, sliced them down, skewered them through 
and roasting all to a turn, set them before Odysseus, 
sizzling hot on the spits. 
Then coating the meat with white barley groats 
and mixing honeyed wine in a carved wooden bowl, 
he sat down across from his guest, inviting warmly, 
"Eat up now, my friend. It's all we slaves have got, 
scrawny pork, while the suitors eat the fatted hogs — 
no fear of the gods in theirhard hearts, no mercy! 
Trust me, the blessed gods have no love for crime. 
They honor justice, honor the decent acts of men. 
Even cutthroat bandits who raid foreign parts — 
and Zeus grants them a healthy share of plunder, 
ships filled to the brim, and back they head for home — 
even their dark hearts are stalked by the dread of vengeance. 
But the suitors know, they've caught some godsent rumor 
of master's grisly death! That's why they have no mind 
to do their courting fairly or go back home in peace. 
No, at their royal ease they devour all his goods, 
those brazen rascals never spare a scrap! 
Not a day or a night goes by, sent down by Zeus, 
but they butcher victims, never stopping at one or two, 
and drain his wine as if there's no tomorrow — 
swilling the last drop ... 
Believe me, my master's wealth was vast! 
No other prince on earth could match his riches, 
not on the loamy mainland or here at home in Ithaca — 
no twenty men in the world could equal A/5 great treasures! 
Let me count them off for you. A dozen herds of cattle 
back on the mainland, just as many head of sheep, 
as many droves of pigs and goatflocks ranging free; 
hired hands or his own herdsmen keep them grazing there. 
Here in Ithaca, goatflocks, eleven in all, scatter 
to graze the island, out at the wild end, 
and trusty goatherds watch their every move. 
And each herdsman, day after day, it never ends, 
drives in a beast for the suitors — best in sight, 
a sheep or well-fed goat. While I tend to these pigs, 
I guard them, pick the best for those carousers 
and send it to the slaughter! " 
His voice rose 
while the stranger ate his meat and drank his wine, 
ravenous, bolting it all down in silence ... 
brooding on ways to serve the suitors right. 
But once he'd supped and refreshed himself with food, 
he filled the wooden bowl he'd been drinking from, 
brimmed it with wine and passed it to his host 
who received the offer gladly, spirit cheered 
as the stranger probed him now with winging words: 
"Friend, who was the man who bought you with his goods, 
the master of such vast riches, powerful as you say? 
You tell me he died defending Agamemnon's honor? 
What's his name? 1 just might know such a man ... 
Zeus would know, and the other deathless gods, 
if 1 ever saw him, if 1 bring you any news. 
I've roamed the whole earth over." 
And the good swineherd answered, foreman of men, 
"Old friend, no wanderer landing here with news of him 
is likely to win his wife and dear son over. 
Random drifters, hungry for bed and board, 
lie through their teeth and swallow back the truth. 
Why, any tramp washed up on Ithaca's shores 
scurries right to my mistress, babbling lies, 
and she ushers him in, kindly, pressing for details, 
and the warm tears of grief come trickling down her cheeks, 
the loyal wife's way when her husband's died abroad. 
Even you, old codger, could rig up some fine tale — 
and soon enough, I'd say, 
if they gave you shirt and clothing for your pains. 
My master? Well, no doubt the dogs and wheeling birds 
have ripped the skin from his ribs by now, his life is through — 
or fish have picked him clean at sea, and the man's bones 
lie piled up on the mainland, buried deep in sand ... 
he's dead and gone. Aye, leaving a broken heart 
for loved ones left behind, for /Tie most of all. 
Never another master kind as he! 
I'll never find one — no matter where 1 go, 
not even if 1 went back to mother and father, 
the house where 1 was born and my parents reared me once. 
Ah, but much as 1 grieve for them, much as 1 long 
to lay my eyes on them, set foot on the old soil, 
it's longing for him, himXhdLX. wrings my heart — 
Odysseus, lost and gone! 
That man, old friend, far away as he is ... 
1 can scarcely bear to say his name aloud, 
so deeply he loved me, cared for me, so deeply. 
Worlds away as he is, 1 call him Master, Brother!" 
"My friend," the great Odysseus, long in exile, answered, 
"since you are dead certain, since you still insist 
he's never coming back, still the soul of denial, 
1 won't simply say it — on my oath 1 swear 
Odysseus is on his way! 
Reward for such good news? Let me have it 
the moment he sets foot in his own house, 
dress me in shirt and cloak, in handsome clothes. 
Before then, poor as 1 am, 1 wouldn't take a thing. 
1 hate that man like the very Gates of Death who, 
ground down by poverty, stoops to peddling lies. 
1 swear by Zeus, the first of all the gods, 
by this table of hospitality here, my host, 
by Odysseus' hearth where 1 have come for help: 
all will come to pass, 1 swear, exactly as 1 say. 
True, this very month— just as the old moon dies 
and the new moon rises into life — Odysseus will return! 
He will come home and take revenge on any man 
who offends his wedded wife and princely son!" 
"Good news," you replied, Eumaeus, loyal swineherd, 
"but 1 will never pay a reward for that, old friend — 
Odysseus, he'll never come home again. Never ... 
Drink your wine, sit back, let's talk of other things. 
Don't remind me of all this. The heart inside me 
breaks when anyone mentions my dear master. 
That oath of yours, we'll let it pass — 
Odysseus, 
oh come back! — 
just as /wish, 1 and Penelope, 
old Laertes too, Telemachus too, the godlike boy. 
How 1 grieve for himno^N, 1 can't stop — Odysseus' son, 
Telemachus. The gods reared him up like a fine young tree 
and 1 often said, Tn the ranks of men he'll match his father, 
his own dear father — amazing in build and looks, that boy!' 
But all of a sudden a god wrecks his sense of balance — 
god or man, no matter — off he's gone to catch 
some news of his father, down to holy Pylos. 
And now those gallant suitors lie in wait for him, 
sailing home, to tear the royal line of Arcesius 
out of Ithaca, root and branch, good name and all! 
Enough. Let Jii'm pass too — ^whether he's trapped 
or the hand of Zeus will pull him through alive. 
Come, 
old soldier, tell me the story of your troubles, 
tell me truly, too, I'd like to know it well ... 
Who are you? where are you from? your city? your parents? 
What sort of vessel brought you? Why did the sailors 
land you here in Ithaca? Who did they say they are? 
1 hardly think you came this way on foot." 
The great teller of tales returned at length, 
"My story — ^the whole truth — I'm glad to tell it all. 
If only the two of us had food and mellow wine 
to last us long, here in your shelter now, 
for us to sup on, undisturbed, 
while others take the work of the world in hand, 
1 could easily spend all year and never reach the end 
of my endless story, all the heartbreaking trials 
1 struggled through. The gods willed it so ... 
1 hail from Crete's broad land, I'm proud to say, 
and 1 am a rich man's son. And many other sons 
he brought up in his palace, born in wedlock, 
sprung of his lawful wife. Unlike my mother. 
She was a slave, a concubine he'd purchased, yes, 
but he treated me on a par with all his true-born sons — 
Castor, Hylax' son. I'm proud to boast his blood, that man 
revered like a god throughout all Crete those days, 
for wealth, power and all his glorious offspring. 
But the deadly spirits soon swept him down 
to the House of Death, and his high and mighty sons 
carved up his lands and then cast lots for the parts 
and gave me just a pittance, a paltry house as well. 
But 1 won myself a wife from wealthy, landed people, 
thanks to my own strong points. 1 was no fool 
and never shirked a fight. 
But now my heyday's gone — 
I've had my share of blows. Yet look hard at the husk 
and you'll still see, 1 think, the grain that gave it life. 
By heaven, Ares gave me courage, Athena too, to break 
the ranks of men wide open, once, in the old days, 
whenever 1 picked my troops and formed an ambush, 
plotting attacks to spring against our foes — 
no hint of death could daunt my fighting spirit! 
Far out of the front I'd charge and spear my man, 
I'd cut down any enemy soldier backing off. 
Such was 1 in battle, true, but 1 had no love 
for working the land, the chores of households either, 
the labor that raises crops of shining children. No, 
it was always oarswept ships that thrilled my heart, 
and wars, and the long polished spears and arrows, 
dreadful gear that makes the next man cringe. 
1 loved them all — god planted that love inside me. 
Each man delights in the work that suits him best. 
Why, long before we Achaeans ever camped at Troy, 
nine commands I led in our deep-sea-going ships, 
raiding foreign men, and a fine haul reached my hands. 
1 helped myself to the lion's share and still more 
came by lot. And my house grew by leaps and bounds, 
1 walked among the Cretans, honored, feared as well. 
But then, when thundering Zeus contrived that expedition — 
that disaster that brought so many fighters to their knees — 
and men kept pressing me and renowned Idomeneus 
to head a fleet to Troy, 
there was no way out, no denying them then, 
the voice of the people bore down much too hard. 
So nine whole years we Achaeans soldiered on at Troy, 
in the tenth we sacked King Priam's city, then embarked 
for home in the long ships, and a god dispersed the fleet. 
Unlucky me. Shrewd old Zeus was plotting still more pain. 
No more than a month 1 stayed at home, taking joy 
in my children, loyal wife and lovely plunder. 
But a spirit in me urged, 'Set sail for Egypt — 
fit out ships, take crews of seasoned heroes!' 
Nine 1 fitted out, the men joined up at once 
and then six days my shipmates feasted well, 
while 1 provided a flock of sheep to offer up 
to the gods and keep the feasters' table groaning. 
On the seventh we launched out from the plains of Crete 
with a stiff North Wind fair astern — smooth sailing, 
aye, like coasting on downstream ... 
And not one craft in our squadron foundered; 
all shipshape, and all hands sound, we sat back 
while the wind and helmsmen kept us true on course. 
Five days out and we raised the great river Nile 
and there in the Nile delta moored our ships of war. 
God knows 1 ordered my trusty crews to stand by, 
just where they were, and guard the anchored fleet 
and 1 sent a patrol to scout things out from higher ground. 
But swept away by their own reckless fury, the crew went berserk — 
they promptly began to plunder the lush Egyptian farms, 
dragged off the women and children, killed the men. 
Outcries reached the city in no time — stirred by shouts 
the entire town came streaming down at the break of day, 
filling the river plain with chariots, ranks of infantry 
and the gleam of bronze. Zeus who loves the lightning 
flung down murderous panic on all my men-at-arms — 
no one dared to stand his ground and fight, 
disaster ringed us round from every quarter. 
Droves of my men they hacked down with swords, 
led off the rest alive, to labor for them as slaves. 
And 1? Zeus flashed an inspiration through my mind, 
though 1 wish I'd died a soldier down in Egypt then! 
A world of pain, you see, still lay in wait for me ... 
Quickly 1 wrenched the skullcap helmet off my head, 
1 tore the shield from my back and dropped my spear 
and ran right into the path of the king's chariot, 
hugged and kissed his knees. He pitied me, spared me, 
hoisted me onto his war-car, took me home in tears. 
Troops of his men came rushing after, shaking javelins, 
mad to kill me — ^their fighting blood at the boil — 
but their master drove them off. 
He feared the wrath of Zeus, the god of guests, 
the first of the gods to pay back acts of outrage. 
So, 
there 1 lingered for seven years, amassing a fortune 
from all the Egyptian people loading me with gifts. 
Then, at last, when the eighth had come full turn, 
along comes this Phoenician one fine day ... 
a scoundrel, swindler, an old hand at lies 
who'd already done the world a lot of damage. 
Well, he smoothly talked me round and off we sailed, 
Phoenicia-bound, where his house and holdings lay. 
There in his care 1 stayed till the year was out. 
Then, when the months and days had run their course 
and the year wheeled round and the seasons came again, 
he conned me aboard his freighter bound for Libya, 
pretending I'd help him ship a cargo there for sale 
but in fact he'd sell meihere and make a killing! 
1 suspected as much, of course, but had no choice, 
so 1 boarded with him, yes, and the ship ran on 
with a good strong North Wind gusting — 
fast on the middle passage clear of Crete — 
but Zeus was brewing mischief for that crew ... 
Once we'd left the island in our wake — 
no land at all in sight, nothing but sea and sky — 
then Zeus the son of Cronus mounted a thunderhead 
above our hollow ship and the deep went black beneath it. 
Then, then in the same breath Zeus hit the craft 
with a lightning-bolt and thunder. Round she spun, 
reeling under the impact, filled with reeking brimstone, 
shipmates pitching out of her, bobbing round like seahawks 
swept along by the breakers past the trim black hull — 
and the god cut short their journey home forever. 
Not mine. 
Zeus himself — when 1 was just at the final gasp — 
thrust the huge mast of my dark-prowed vessel 
right into my arms so 1 might flee disaster 
one more time. Wrapping myself around it, 
1 was borne along by the wretched galewinds, 
rushed along nine days — on the tenth, at dead of night, 
a shouldering breaker rolled me up along Thesprotia's beaches. 
There the king of Thesprotia, Phidon, my salvation, 
treated me kindly, asked for no reward at all. 
His own good son had found me, half-dead 
from exhaustion and the cold. He raised me up 
by the hand and led me home to his father's house 
and dressed me in cloak and shirt and decent clothes. 
That's where 1 first got wind of AJm — Odysseus ... 
The king told me he'd hosted the man in style, 
befriended him on his way home to native land, 
and showed me all the treasure Odysseus had amassed. 
Bronze and gold and plenty of hard wrought iron, 
enough to last a man and ten generations of his heirs — 
so great the wealth stored up for Jn'm in the king's vaults! 
But Odysseus, he made clear, was off at Dodona then 
to hear the will of Zeus that rustles forth 
from the god's tall leafy oak: how should he return, 
after all the years away, to his own green land of Ithaca — 
openly or in secret? Phidon swore to me, what's more, 
as the princely man poured out libations in his house, 
The ship's hauled down and the crew set to sail, 
to take Odysseus home to native land.' 
Butl... 
he shipped me off before. A Thesprotian cutter 
chanced to be heading for Dulichion rich in wheat, 
so he told the crew to take me to the king, Acastus, 
treat me kindly, too, but it pleased them more 
to scheme foul play against me, 
sink me into the very depths of pain. As soon 
as the ship was far off land, scudding in mid-sea, 
they sprang their trap — my day of slavery then and there! 
They stripped from my back the shirt and cloak 1 wore, 
decked me out in a new suit of clothes, all rags, 
ripped and filthy — the rags you see right now. 
But then, once they'd gained the fields of Ithaca, 
still clear in the evening light, they lashed me fast 
to the rowing-benches, twisting a cable round me; 
all hands went ashore 
and rushed to catch their supper on the beach. 
But the gods themselves unhitched my knots at once 
with the gods' own ease. 1 wrapped my head in rags, 
slid down the gangplank polished smooth, slipped my body 
into the water, not a splash, chest-high, then quick, 
launched out with both my arms and swam away — 
out of the surf in no time, clear of the crew. 
1 clambered upland, into a flowery, fragrant brush 
and crouched there, huddling low. They raised a hue and cry, 
wildly beat the bushes, but when it seemed no use 
to pursue the hunt, back they trudged again and 
boarded their empty ship. 
The gods hid me themselves — 
it's light work for them — and brought me here, 
the homestead of a man who knows the world. 
So it seems to be my lot that I'll live on. " 
And you replied, Eumaeus, loyal swineherd, 
"So much misery, friend! You've moved my heart, 
deeply, with your long tale ... such blows, such roving. 
But one part's off the mark, 1 know — you'll never persuade me — 
what you say about Odysseus. A man in your condition, 
who are you, 1 ask you, to lie for no good reason? 
Well 1 know the truth of my good lord's return, 
how the gods detested him, with a vengeance — 
never letting him go under, fighting Trojans, 
or die in the arms of loved ones, 
once he'd wound down the long coil of war. 
Then all united Achaea would have raised his tomb 
and he'd have won his son great fame for years to come. 
But now the whirlwinds have ripped him away — no fame for him. 
And 1 live here, cut off from the world, with all my pigs. 
I never go into town unless, perhaps, wise Penelope 
calls me back, when news drops in from nowhere. 
There they crowd the messenger, cross-examine him, 
heartsick for their long-lost lord or all too glad 
to eat him out of house and home, scot-free. 
But I've no love for all that probing, prying, 
not since some Aetolian fooled me with his yarn. 
He'd killed a man, wandered over the face of the earth, 
stumbled onto my hut, and 1 received him warmly. 
He told me he'd seen Odysseus 
lodged with King Idomeneus down in Crete — 
refitting his ships, hard-hit by the gales, 
but he'd be home, he said, by summer or harvest-time, 
his hulls freighted with treasure, manned by fighting crews. 
So you, old misery, seeing a god has led you here to me, 
don't try to charm me now, don't spellbind /newith lies! 
Never for that^N\\\ 1 respect you, treat you kindly; 
no, it's my fear of Zeus, the god of guests. 
and because I pity you ..." 
"Good god, " the crafty man pressed on, 
"what a dark, suspicious heart you have inside you! 
Not even my oath can win you over, make you see the light. 
Come, strike a bargain — all the gods of Olympus 
witness now our pact! 
If your master returns, here to your house, 
dress me in shirt and cloak and send me off 
to Dulichion at once, the place 1 long to be. 
But if your master doesn't return as 1 predict, 
set your men on me — fling me off some rocky crag 
so the next beggar here may just think twice 
before he peddles lies. " 
"Surely, friend!"— 
the swineherd shook his head — "and just think 
of the praise and fame I'd win among mankind, 
now and for all time to come, if first 1 took you 
under my roof, 1 treated you kindly as my guest 
then cut you down and robbed you of your life — 
how keen I'd be to say my prayers to Zeus! 
But it's high time for a meal. 
1 hope the men will come home any moment 
so we can fix a tasty supper in the lodge. " 
As host and guest confided back and forth 
the herdsmen came in, driving their hogs up close, 
penning sows in their proper sties for the night, 
squealing for all they're worth, shut inside their yard, 
and the good swineherd shouted to his men, 
"Bring in your fattest hog! 
I'll slaughter it for our guest from far abroad. 
We'll savor it ourselves. All too long we've sweated 
over these white-tusked boars — our wretched labor — 
while others wolf our work down free of charge!" 
Calling out 
as he split up kindling now with a good sharp ax 
and his men hauled in a tusker five years old. 
rippling fat, and stood him steady by the hearth. 
The swineherd, soul of virtue, did not forget the gods. 
He began the rite by plucking tufts from the porker's head, 
threw them into the fire and prayed to all the powers, 
"Bring him home, our wise Odysseus, home at last!" 
Then raising himself full-length, with an oak log 
he'd left unsplit he clubbed and stunned the beast 
and it gasped out its life ... 
The men slashed its throat, singed the carcass, 
quickly quartered it all, and then the swineherd, 
cutting first strips for the gods from every limb, 
spread them across the thighs, wrapped in sleek fat, 
and sprinkling barley over them, flung them on the fire. 
They sliced the rest into pieces, pierced them with skewers, 
broiled them all to a turn and, pulling them off the spits, 
piled the platters high. The swineherd, standing up 
to share the meat — his sense of fairness perfect — 
carved it all out into seven equal portions. 
One he set aside, lifting up a prayer 
to the forest nymphs and Hermes, Maia's son, 
and the rest he handed on to each man in turn. 
But to Odysseus he presented the boar's long loin 
and the cut of honor cheered his master's heart. 
The man for all occasions thanked his host: 
"1 pray, Eumaeus, you'll be as dear to Father Zeus 
as you are to me — a man in my condition — 
you honor me by giving me your best." 
You replied in kind, Eumaeus, swineherd: 
"Eat, my strange new friend ... enjoy it now, 
it's all we have to offer. As for Father Zeus, 
one thing he will give and another he'll hold back, 
whatever his pleasure. All things are in his power." 
He burned choice parts for the gods who never die 
and pouring glistening wine in a full libation, 
placed the cup in his guest's hands — Odysseus, 
raider of cities — and down he sat to his own share. 
Mesaulius served them bread, a man the swineherd 
purchased for himself in his master's absence — 
alone, apart from his queen or old Laertes — 
bought him from Taphians, bartered his own goods. 
They reached out for the spread that lay at hand 
and when they'd put aside desire for food and drink, 
Mesaulius cleared the things away. And now, content 
with bread and meat, they made for bed at once. 
A foul night came on — the dark of the moon — and Zeus 
rained from dusk to dawn and a sodden West Wind raged. 
Odysseus spoke up now, keen to test the swineherd. 
Would he take his cloak off, hand it to his guest 
or at least tell one of his men to do the same? 
He cared for the stranger so, who ventured now, 
"Listen, Eumaeus, and all you comrades here, 
allow me to sing my praises for a moment. 
Say it's the wine that leads me on, the wild wine 
that sets the wisest man to sing at the top of his lungs, 
laugh like a fool — it drives the man to dancing ... it even 
tempts him to blurt out stories better never told. 
But now that I'm sounding off, 1 can't hold back. 
Oh make me young again, and the strength inside me 
steady as a rock! Just as 1 was that day 
we sprang a sudden ambush against the Trojans. 
Odysseus led the raid with Atreus' son Menelaus. 
1 was third in command — they'd chosen me themselves. 
Once we'd edged up under the city's steep ramparts, 
crowding the walls but sinking into the thick brake, 
the reeds and marshy flats, huddling under our armor 
there we lay, and a foul night came on, the North Wind struck, 
freezing cold, and down from the skies the snow fell like frost, 
packed hard — ^the rims of our shields armored round with ice. 
There all the rest of the men wore shirts and cloaks and, 
hunching shields over their shoulders, slept at ease. 
Not 1. I'd left my cloak at camp when 1 set out- — 
idiot — never thinking it might turn cold, 
so 1 joined in with just the shield on my back 
and a shining waist-guard ... But then at last, 
the night's third watch, the stars just wheeling down — 
I muttered into his ear, Odysseus, right beside me, 
nudging him with an elbow — he perked up at once — 
'Royal son of Laertes, Odysseus, full of tactics, 
I'm not long for the living. The cold will do me in. 
See, I've got no cloak. Some spirit's fooled me — 
1 came out half-dressed. Now there's no escape!' 
1 hadn't finished — a thought flashed in his mind; 
no one could touch the man at plots or battles. 
'Shhh!' he hissed back — Odysseus had a plan — 
'One of our fighters over there might hear you.' 
Then he propped his head on his forearm, calling out, 
'Friends, wake up. 1 slept and a god sent down a dream. 
It warned that we're too far from the ships, exposed. 
Go, someone, tell Agamemnon, our field marshal — 
he might rush reinforcements from the beach.' 
Thoas, son of Andraemon, sprang up at once, 
flung off his purple cloak and ran to the ships 
while 1, bundling into his wrap, was glad at heart 
till Dawn rose on her golden throne once more. 
Oh make me young again 
and the strength inside me steady as a rock! 
One of the swineherds here would lend a wrap, 
for love of a good soldier, respect as well. 
Now they spurn me, dressed in filthy rags." 
And you replied, Eumaeus, loyal swineherd, 
"Now tAatynas a fine yarn you told, old-timer, 
not without point, not without profit either. 
You won't want for clothes or whatever else 
is due a worn-out traveler come for help — 
not for tonight at least. Tomorrow morning 
you'll have to flap around in rags again. 
Here we've got no store of shirts and cloaks, 
no changes. Just one wrap per man, that's all. 
But just you wait till Odysseus' dear son comes back — 
that boy will deck you out in a cloak and shirt 
and send you off, wherever your heart desires!" 
With that 
he rose to his feet, laid out a bed by the fire, 
throwing over it skins of sheep and goats and 
down Odysseus lay. Eumaeus flung on his guest 
the heavy flaring cloak he kept in reserve 
to wear when winter brought some wild storm. 
So here 
Odysseus slept and the young hands slept beside him. 
Not the swineherd. Not his style to bed indoors, 
apart from his pigs. He geared up to go outside 
and it warmed Odysseus' heart, 
Eumaeus cared so much for his absent master's goods. 
First, over his broad shoulders he slung a whetted sword, 
wrapped himself in a cloak stitched tight to block the wind, 
and adding a cape, the pelt of a shaggy well-fed goat, 
he took a good sharp lance to fight off men and dogs. 
Then out he went to sleep where his white-tusked boars 
had settled down for the night ... just under 
a jutting crag that broke the North Wind's blast. 
The Prince Sets Sail 
for Home 
Now south through the spacious dancing-rings of Lacedaemon 
Athena went to remind the hero's princely son 
of his journey home and spur him on his way. 
She found him there with Nestor's gallant son, 
bedded down in the porch of illustrious Menelaus — 
Pisistratus, at least overcome with deep sound sleep, 
but not Telemachus. Welcome sleep could not hold him. 
All through the godsent night he lay awake ... 
tossing with anxious thoughts about his father. 
Hovering over him, eyes ablaze, Athena said, 
"It's wrong, Telemachus, wrong to rove so far, 
so long from home, leaving your own holdings 
unprotected — crowds in your palace so brazen 
they'll carve up all your wealth, devour it all, 
and then your journey here will come to nothing. 
Quickly, press Menelaus, lord of the warcry , 
to speed you home at once, if you want to find 
your irreproachable mother still inside your house. 
Even now her father and brothers urge Penelope 
to marry Eurymachus, who excels all other suitors 
at giving gifts and drives the bride-price higher. 
She must not carry anything off against your will! 
You know how the heart of a woman always works: 
she likes to build the wealth of her new groom — 
of the sons she bore, of her dear, departed husband, 
not a memory of the dead, no questions asked. 
So sail for home, 1 say! 
With your own hands turn over all your goods 
to the one serving-woman you can trust the most, 
till the gods bring to light your own noble bride. 
And another thing. Take it to heart, 1 tell you. 
Picked men of the suitors lie in ambush, grim-set 
in the straits between Ithaca and rocky Same, 
poised to kill you before you can reach home, 
but 1 have my doubts they will. Sooner the earth 
will swallow down a few of those young gallants 
who eat you out of house and home these days! 
Just give the channel islands a wide berth, 
push on in your trim ship, sail night and day, 
and the deathless god who guards and pulls you through 
will send you a fresh fair wind from hard astern. 
At your first landfall, Ithaca's outer banks, 
speed ship and shipmates round to the city side. 
But you — you make your way to the swineherd first, 
in charge of your pigs, and true to you as always. 
Sleep the night there, send him to town at once 
to tell the news to your mother, wise Penelope — 
you've made it back from Pylos safe and sound." 
Mission accomplished, back she went to Olympus' heights 
as Telemachus woke Nestor's son from his sweet sleep; 
he dug a heel in his ribs and roused him briskly: 
"Up, Pisistratus. Hitch the team to the chariot — 
let's head for home at once!" 
"No, Telemachus," 
Nestor's son objected, "much as we long to go, 
we cannot drive a team in the dead of night. 
Morning will soon be here. So wait, I say, 
wait till he loads our chariot down with gifts — 
the hero Atrides, Menelaus, the great spearman — 
and gives us warm salutes and sees us off like princes. 
That's the man a guest will remember all his days: 
the lavish host who showers him with kindness. " 
At those words Dawn rose on her golden throne 
and Menelaus, lord of the warcry , rising up from bed 
by the side of Helen with her loose and lovely hair, 
walked toward his guests. As soon as he saw him, 
Telemachus rushed to pull a shimmering tunic on, 
over his broad shoulders threw his flaring cape 
and the young prince, son of King Odysseus, 
strode out to meet his host: "Menelaus, 
royal son of Atreus, captain of armies, 
let me go back to my own country now. 
The heart inside me longs for home at last." 
The lord of the warcry reassured the prince, 
"I'd never detain you here too long, Telemachus, 
not if your heart is set on going home. 
I'd find fault with another host, I'm sure, 
too warm to his guests, too pressing or too cold. 
Balance is best in all things. It's bad either way, 
spurring the stranger home who wants to linger, 
holding the one who longs to leave — you know, 
'Welcome the coming, speed the parting guest!' 
But wait till 1 load your chariot down with gifts — 
fine ones, too, you'll see with your own eyes — 
and tell the maids to serve a meal at hall. 
We have god's plenty here. 
It's honor and glory to us, a help to you as well. 
if you dine in style first, then leave to see the world. 
And if you're keen for the grand tour of all Hellas, 
right to the depths of Argos, I'll escort you myself, 
harness the horses, guide you through the towns. 
And no host will turn us away with empty hands, 
each will give us at least one gift to prize — 
a handsome tripod, cauldron forged in bronze, 
a brace of mules or a solid golden cup." 
Firmly resolved, Telemachus replied, 
"Menelaus, royal Atrides, captain of armies, 
1 must go back to my own home at once. 
When 1 started out 1 left no one behind 
to guard my own possessions. God forbid, 
searching for my great father, 1 lose my life 
or lose some priceless treasure from my house!" 
As soon as the lord of the warcry heard that, 
he told his wife and serving-women to lay out a meal 
in the hall at once. They'd stores aplenty there. 
Eteoneus, son of Boethous, came to join them — 
fresh from bed, he lived close by the palace. 
The warlord Menelaus told him to build a fire 
and broil some meat. He quickly did his bidding. 
Down Atrides walked to a storeroom filled with scent, 
and not alone: Helen and Megapenthes went along. 
Reaching the spot where all the heirlooms lay, 
Menelaus chose a generous two-handled cup; 
he told his son Megapenthes to take a mixing-bowl, 
solid silver, while Helen lingered beside the chests, 
and there they were, brocaded, beautiful robes 
her own hands had woven. Queenly Helen, 
radiance of women, lifted one from the lot, 
the largest, loveliest robe, and richly worked 
and like a star it glistened, deep beneath the others. 
Then all three went up and on through the halls until 
they found Telemachus. The red-haired king spoke out: 
"Oh my boy, may Zeus the Thunderer, Hera's lord. 
grant you the journey home your heart desires! 
Of all the treasures lying heaped in my palace 
you shall have the finest, most esteemed. Look, 
I'll give you this mixing-bowl, forged to perfection — 
it's solid silver finished off with a lip of gold. 
Hephaestus made it himself. And a royal friend, 
Phaedimus, king of Sidon, lavished it on me 
when his palace welcomed me on passage home. 
How pleased I'd be if you took it as a gift! " 
And the warlord placed the two-eared cup 
in his hands while stalwart Megapenthes carried in 
the glittering silver bowl and set it down before him. 
Helen, her cheeks flushed with beauty, moved beside him, 
holding the robe in her arms, and offered, warmly, 
"Here, dear boy, 1 too have a gift to give you, 
a keepsake of Helen — 1 wove it with my hands — 
for your own bride to wear 
when the blissful day of marriage dawns ... 
Until then, let it rest in your mother's room. 
And may you return in joy — my parting wish — 
to your own grand house, your native land at last." 
With that 
she laid the robe in his arms, and he received it gladly. 
Prince Pisistratus, taking the gifts, stowed them deep 
in the chariot cradle, viewed them all with wonder. 
The red-haired warlord led them back to his house 
and the guests took seats on low and high-backed chairs. 
A maid brought water soon in a graceful golden pitcher 
and over a silver basin tipped it out 
so they might rinse their hands, 
then pulled a gleaming table to their side. 
A staid housekeeper brought on bread to serve them, 
appetizers aplenty too, lavish with her bounty. 
Ready Eteoneus carved and passed the meat, 
the son of illustrious Menelaus poured their wine. 
They reached out for the good things that lay at hand 
and once they 'd put aside desire for food and drink. 
Prince Telemachus and the gallant son of Nestor 
yoked their team, mounted the blazoned car 
and drove through the gates and echoing colonnade. 
The red-haired King Menelaus followed both boys out, 
his right hand holding a golden cup of honeyed wine 
so the two might pour libations forth at parting. 
Just in front of the straining team he strode, 
lifting his cup and pledging both his guests: 
"Farewell, my princes! Give my warm greetings 
to Nestor, the great commander, 
always kind to me as a father, long ago 
when we young men of Achaea fought at Troy." 
And tactful Telemachus replied at once, 
"Surely, my royal host, we'll tell him all, 
as soon as we reach old Nestor — all you say. 
1 wish 1 were just as sure I'd find Odysseus 
waiting there at home when 1 reach Ithaca. 
I'd tell him 1 come from you, 
treated with so much kindness at your hands, 
loaded down with all these priceless gifts!" 
At his last words a bird flew past on the right, 
an eagle clutching a huge white goose in its talons, 
plucked from the household yards. And all rushed after, 
shouting, men and women, and swooping toward the chariot now 
the bird veered off to the right again before the horses. 
All looked up, overjoyed — people's spirits lifted. 
Nestor's son Pisistratus spoke out first: 
"Look there! King Menelaus, captain of armies, 
what, did the god send down that sign for you 
or the two of us?' 
The warlord fell to thinking — 
how to read the omen rightly, how to reply? ... 
But long-robed Helen stepped in well before him: 
"Listen to me and 1 will be your prophet, 
sure as the gods have flashed it in my mind 
and it will come to pass, 1 know it will. 
Just as the eagle swooped down from the crags 
where it was born and bred, just as it snatched 
that goose fattened up for the kill inside the house, 
so, after many trials and roving long and hard, 
Odysseus will descend on his house and take revenge — 
unless he's home already, sowing seeds of ruin 
for that whole crowd of suitors! " 
"Oh if only," 
pensive Telemachus burst out in thanks to Helen, 
"Zeus the thundering lord of Hera makes it so — 
even at home I'll pray to you as a deathless goddess!" 
He cracked the lash and the horses broke quickly, 
careering through the city out into open country, 
shaking the yoke across their shoulders all day long. 
The sun sank and the roads of the world grew dark 
as they reached Phera, pulling up to Diodes' halls, 
the son of Ortilochus, son of the Alpheus River. 
He gave them a royal welcome; there they slept the night. 
When young Dawn with her rose-red fingers shone once more 
they yoked their pair again, mounted the blazoned car 
and out through the gates and echoing colonnade 
they whipped the team to a run and on they flew, 
holding nothing back, approaching Pylos soon, 
the craggy citadel. That was when Telemachus 
turned to Pisistratus, saying, "Son of Nestor, 
won't you do as 1 ask you, see it through? 
We're friends for all our days now, so we claim, 
thanks to our fathers' friendship. We're the same age as well 
and this tour of ours has made us more like brothers. 
Prince, don't drive me past my vessel, drop me there. 
Your father's old, in love with his hospitality; 
1 fear he'll hold me, chafing in his palace — 
1 must hurry home!" 
The son of Nestor pondered ... 
how to do it properly, see it through? 
Pausing a moment, then this way seemed best. 
Swerving his team, he drove down to the ship 
tied up on shore and loaded into her stern 
the splendid gifts, the robes and gold Menelaus gave, 
and sped his friend with a flight of winging words: 
"Climb aboard now — fast! Muster all your men 
before 1 get home and break the news to father. 
With that man's overbearing spirit — 1 know it, 
know it all too well — he'll never let you go, 
he'll come down here and summon you himself. 
He won't return without you, believe me; 
in any case he'll fly into a rage." 
With that warning he whipped his sleek horses 
back to Pylos city and reached his house in no time. 
Telemachus shouted out commands to all his shipmates: 
"Stow our gear, my comrades, deep in the holds 
and board at once — we must be on our way!" 
His shipmates snapped to orders, 
swung aboard and sat to the oars in ranks. 
But just as Telemachus prepared to launch, 
praying, sacrificing to Pallas by the stern, 
a man from a far-off country came toward him now, 
a fugitive out of Argos: he had killed a man ... 
He was a prophet, sprung of Melampus' line of seers, 
Melampus who lived in Pylos, mother of flocks, some years ago, 
rich among his Pylians, at home in his great high house 
until he was made to go abroad to foreign parts, 
fleeing his native land and hot-blooded Neleus — 
most imperious man alive — ^who'd commandeered 
his vast estate and held it down by force 
for one entire year. That year Melampus, 
bound by cruel chains in the halls of Phylacus, 
suffered agonies — all for Neleus' daughter Pero, 
that and the mad spell a Fury, murderous spirit, 
cast upon his mind. But the seer worked free of death 
and drove the lusty, bellowing cattle out of Phylace, 
back to Pylos. There he avenged himself on Neleus 
for the shameful thing the king had done to him, 
and escorted Pero home as his brother's bride. 
But he himself went off to a distant country, 
Argos, land of stallions — his destined home 
where he would live and rule the Argive nation. 
Here he married a wife and built a high-roofed house 
and sired Antiphates and Mantius, two staunch sons. 
Antiphates fathered Oicles, gallant heart, 
Oicles fathered Amphiaraus, driver of armies, 
whom storming Zeus and Apollo loved intensely, 
showering him with every form of kindness. 
But he never reached the threshold of old age, 
he died at Thebes — undone by a bribe his wife accepted — 
leaving behind his two sons, Alcmaeon and Amphilochus. 
On his side Mantius sired Polyphides and Clitus both 
but Dawn of the golden throne whisked Clitus away, 
overwhelmed by his beauty, 
so the boy would live among the deathless gods. 
Yet Apollo made magnanimous Polyphides a prophet — 
after Amphiaraus' death — the greatest seer on earth. 
But a feud with his father drove him off to Hyperesia 
where he made his home and prophesied to the world ... 
This prophet's son it was — ^Theocly menus his name — 
who approached Telemachus now and found him pouring 
wine to a god and saying prayers beside his ship. 
"Friend," he said in a winging supplication, 
"since 1 find you burning offerings here, 
1 beg you by these rites and the god you pray to, 
then by your own life and the lives of all the men 
who travel with you — ^tell me truly, don't hold back, 
who are you? where are you from? your city? your parents?" 
"Of course, stranger, " the forthright prince responded, 
"1 will tell you everything, clearly as 1 can. 
Ithaca is my country. Odysseus is my father — 
there was a man, or was he all a dream? ... 
but he's surely died a wretched death by now. 
Yet here I've come with my crew and black ship, 
out for news of my father, lost and gone so long." 
And the godlike seer Theoclymenus replied, 
"Just like you, I too have left my land — 
I because I killed a man of my own tribe. 
But he has many brothers and kin in Argos, 
stallion-land, who rule the plains in force. 
Fleeing death at their hands, a dismal fate, 
1 am a fugitive now, 
doomed to wander across this mortal world. 
So take me aboard, hear a fugitive's prayer: 
don't let them kill me — they're after me, well 1 know!" 
"So desperate! " thoughtful Telemachus exclaimed. 
"How could 1 drive you from my ship? Come sail with us, 
we'll tend you at home, with all we can provide." 
And he took the prophet's honed bronze spear, 
laid it down full-length on the rolling deck, 
swung aboard the deep-sea craft himself, 
assuming the pilot's seat reserved astern 
and put the seer beside him. Cables cast off, 
Telemachus shouted out commands to all his shipmates: 
"All lay hands to tackle!" They sprang to orders, 
hoisting the pinewood mast, they stepped it firm 
in its block amidships, lashed it fast with stays 
and with braided rawhide halyards hauled the white sail high. 
Now bright-eyed Athena sent them a stiff following wind 
blustering out of a clear sky, gusting on so the ship 
might run its course through the salt sea at top speed — 
and past the Springs she raced and the Chalcis' rushing stream 
as the sun sank and the roads of the world grew dark and 
on she pressed for Pheae, driven on by a wind from Zeus 
and flew past lovely Elis, where Epeans rule in power. 
and then Telemachus veered for the Jagged Islands, 
wondering all the way — 
would he sweep clear of death or be cut down? 
The king and loyal swineherd, just that night, 
were supping with other fleldhands in the lodge. 
Once they 'd put aside desire for food and drink, 
Odysseus spoke up, eager to test the swineherd, 
see if he'd stretch out his warm welcome now, 
invite him to stay on in the farmstead here 
or send him off to town. "Listen, Eumaeus, 
all you comrades here — at the crack of dawn 
1 mean to go to town and do my begging, 
not be a drain on you and all your men. 
But advise me well, give me a trusty guide 
to see me there. And then I'm on my own 
to roam the streets — 1 must, 1 have no choice — 
hoping to find a handout, just a crust or cupful. 
I'd really like to go to the house of King Odysseus 
and give my news to his cautious queen, Penelope. 
Why, I'd even mix with those overweening suitors — 
would they spare me a plateful? Look at all they have! 
I'd do good work for them, promptly, anything they want. 
Let me tell you, listen closely, catch my drift ... 
Thanks to Hermes the guide, who gives all work 
of our hands the grace and fame that it deserves, 
no one alive can match me at household chores: 
building a good fire, splitting kindling neatly, 
carving, roasting meat and pouring rounds of wine ... 
anything menials do to serve their noble masters." 
"God's sake, my friend!" you broke in now, 
Eumaeus, loyal swineherd, deeply troubled. 
"What's got into your head, what crazy plan? 
You must be hell-bent on destruction, on the spot, 
if you're keen to mingle with that mob of suitors — 
their pride and violence hit the iron skies! 
They 're a far cry from you, 
the men who do their bidding. Young bucks, 
all rigged out in their fine robes and shirts, 
hair sleeked down with oil, faces always beaming, 
the ones who slave for them/The tables polished, 
sagging under the bread and meat and wine. 
No, stay here. No one finds you a burden, 
surely not 1, not any comrade here. 
You wait till Odysseus' dear son comes back — 
that boy will deck you out in a cloak and shirt 
and send you off, wherever your heart desires! " 
"If only, Eumaeus," the wayworn exile said, 
"you were as dear to Father Zeus as you are to me! 
You who stopped my pain, my endless, homesick roving. 
Tramping about the world — there's nothing worse for a man. 
But the fact is that men put up with misery 
to stuff their cursed bellies. 
But seeing you hold me here, urging me now 
to wait for AJm, the prince who's on his way, 
tell me about the mother of King Odysseus, please, 
the father he left as well — on the threshold of old age — 
when he sailed off to war. Are they still alive, 
perhaps, still looking into the light of day? 
Or dead by now, and down in Death's long house?" 
"Friend," 
the swineherd, foreman of men, assured his guest, 
"I'll tell you the whole story, point by point. 
Laertes is still alive, but night and day 
he prays to Zeus, waiting there in his house, 
for the life breath to slip away and leave his body. 
His heart's so racked for his son, lost and gone these years, 
for his wife so fine, so wise — Aerdeath is the worst blow 
he's had to suffer — it made him old before his time. 
She died of grief for her boy, her glorious boy, 
it wore her down, a wretched way to go. 
1 pray that no one 1 love dies such a death, 
no island neighbor of mine who treats me kindly! 
While she was still alive, heartsick as she was. 
it always moved me to ask about her, learn the news. 
She'd reared me herself, and right beside her daughter, 
Ctimene, graceful girl with her long light gown, 
the youngest one she'd borne ... 
Just the two of us, growing up together, 
the woman tending me almost like her child, 
till we both reached the lovely flush of youth 
and then her parents gave her away in marriage, yes, 
to a Samian man, and a haul of gifts they got. 
But her mother decked me out in cloak and shirt, 
good clothing she wrapped about me — gave me sandals, 
sent me here, this farm. She loved me from the heart. 
Oh how 1 miss her kindness now! The happy gods 
speed the work that 1 labor at, that gives me 
food and drink to spare for the ones 1 value. 
But from Queen Penelope 1 never get a thing, 
never a winning word, no friendly gesture, 
not since this, this plague has hit the house — 
these high and mighty suitors. Servants miss it, 
terribly, gossiping back and forth with the mistress, 
gathering scraps of news, a snack and a cup or two, 
then taking home to the fields some little gift. 
It never fails to cheer a servant's heart." 
"Imagine that," his canny master said, 
"you must have been just a little fellow, Eumaeus, 
when you were swept so far from home and parents. 
Come, tell me the whole story, truly too. 
Was your city sacked? — 
some city filled with people and wide streets 
where your father and your mother made their home? 
Or were you all alone, herding your sheep and cattle, 
when pirates kidnapped, shipped and sold you off 
to this man's house, who paid a healthy price?" 
"My friend," the swineherd answered, foreman of men, 
"you really want my story? So many questions — ^well, 
listen in quiet, then, and take your ease, sit back 
and drink your wine. The nights are endless now. 
We've plenty of time to sleep or savor a long tale. 
No need, you know, to turn in before the hour. 
Even too much sleep can be a bore. 
But anyone else who feels the urge 
can go to bed and then, at the crack of dawn, 
break bread, turn out and tend our master's pigs. 
We two will keep to the shelter here, eat and drink 
and take some joy in each other 's heartbreaking sorrows, 
sharing each other's memories. Over the years, you know, 
a man finds solace even in old sorrows, true, a man 
who's weathered many blows and wandered many miles. 
My own story? This will answer all your questions ... 
There's an island, Sy rie — you may have heard of it — 
off above Ortygia, where the sun wheels around. 
Not so packed with people, still a good place, though, 
fine for sheep and cattle, rich in wine and wheat. 
Hunger never attacks the land, no sickness either, 
that always stalks the lives of us poor men. 
No, as each generation grows old on the island, 
down Apollo comes with his silver bow, with Artemis, 
and they shoot them all to death with gentle arrows. 
Two cities there are, that split the land in half, 
and over them both my father ruled in force — 
Or menus' son Ctesius, a man like a deathless god. 
One day 
a band of Phoenicians landed there. The famous sea-dogs, 
sharp bargainers too, the holds of their black ship 
brimful with a hoard of flashy baubles. Now, 
my father kept a Phoenician woman in his house, 
beautiful, tall and skilled at weaving lovely things, 
and her rascal countrymen lusted to seduce her, yes, 
and lost no time — she was washing clothes when one of them 
waylaid her beside their ship, in a long deep embrace 
that can break a woman's will, even the best alive. 
And then he asked her questions ... 
her name, who was she, where did she come from? 
She waved at once to my father's high-roofed house — 
'But I'm proud to hail from Sidon paved in bronze,' she said, 
'and Ary has was my father, a man who rolled in wealth. 
I was heading home from the fields when Taphian pirates 
snatched me away, and they shipped and sold me here 
to this man's house. He paid a good stiff price!' 
The sailor, her secret lover, lured her on: 
'Well then, why don't you sail back home with us? — 
see your own high house, your father and mother there. 
They're still alive, and people say they're rich!' 
'Now there's a tempting offer,' she said in haste, 
'if only you sailors here would swear an oath 
you'll land me safe at home without a scratch.' 
Those were her terms, and once they vowed to keep them, 
swore their oaths they'd never do her harm, 
the woman hatched a plan: 'Now mum's the word! 
Let none of your shipmates say a thing to me, 
meeting me on the street or at the springs. 
Someone might go running off to the house 
and tell the old king — he'd think the worst, 
clap me in cruel chains and find a way to kill you. 
So keep it a secret, down deep, get on with buying 
your home cargo, quickly. But once your holds 
are loaded up with goods, then fast as you can 
you send the word to me over there at the palace. 
I'll bring you all the gold 1 can lay my hands on, 
and something else I'll give you in the bargain, 
fare for passage home ... 
I'm nurse to my master's son in the palace now — 
such a precious toddler, scampering round outside, 
always at my heels. I'll bring him aboard as well. 
Wherever you sell him off, whatever foreign parts, 
he'll fetch you quite a price!' 
Bargain struck, 
back the woman went to our lofty halls 
and the rovers stayed on with us one whole year, 
bartering, piling up big hoards in their hollow ship, 
and once their holds were loaded full for sailing 
they sent a messenger, fast, to alert the woman. 
This crafty bandit came to my father's house, 
dangling a golden choker linked with amber beads, 
and while the maids at hall and my noble mother 
kept on fondling it — dazzled, feasting their eyes 
and making bids — he gave a quiet nod to my nurse, 
he gave her the nod and slunk back to his ship. 
Grabbing my hand, she swept me through the house 
and there in the porch she came on cups and tables 
left by the latest f casters, father's men of council 
just gone off to the meeting grounds for full debate — 
and quick as a flash she snatched up three goblets, 
tucked them into her bosom, whisked them off 
and 1 tagged along, lost in all my innocence! 
The sun sank, the roads of the world grew dark 
and both on the run, we reached the bay at once 
where the swift Phoenician ship lay set to sail. 
Handing us up on board, the crewmen launched out 
on the foaming lanes and Zeus sent wind astern. 
Six whole days we sailed, six nights, nonstop, 
and then, when the god brought on the seventh day, 
Artemis showering arrows came and shot the woman — 
headfirst into the bilge she splashed like a diving tern 
and the crewmen heaved her body over, a nice treat 
for the seals and fish, but left me all alone, 
cowering, sick at heart ... 
Until, at last, 
the wind and current bore us on to Ithaca, 
here where Laertes bought me with his wealth. 
And so 1 first laid eyes on this good land." 
And royal King Odysseus answered warmly, 
"Eumaeus, so much misery! You've moved my heart, 
deeply, with your long tale — such pain, such sorrow. 
True, but look at the good fortune Zeus sends you. 
hand-in-hand with the bad. After all your toil 
you reached the house of a decent, kindly man 
who gives you all you need in meat and drink — 
he's seen to that, I'd say — 
it's a fine life you lead! Better than mine ... 
I've been drifting through cities up and down the earth 
and now I've landed here." 
So guest and host 
confided through the night until they slept, 
a little at least, not long. 
Dawn soon rose and took her golden throne. 
That hour 
Telemachus and his shipmates raised the coasts of home, 
they struck sail and lowered the mast, smartly, 
rowed her into a mooring under oars. 
Out went the bow-stones, cables fast astern, 
the crew themselves swung out in the breaking surf, 
they got a meal together and mixed some ruddy wine. 
And once they 'd put aside desire for food and drink, 
clear-headed Telemachus gave the men commands: 
"Pull our black ship round to the city now — 
I'm off to my herdsmen and my farms. By nightfall, 
once I've seen to my holdings, I'll be down in town. 
In the morning I'll give you wages for the voyage, 
a handsome feast of meat and hearty wine." 
The seer Theocly menus broke in quickly, 
"Where shall 1 go, dear boy? Of all the lords 
in rocky Ithaca, whose house shall 1 head for now? 
Or do 1 go straight to your mother's house and yours?" 
"Surely in better times," discreet Telemachus replied, 
"1 would invite you home. Our hospitality never fails, 
but now, 1 fear, it could only serve you poorly. 
I'll be away, and mother would never see you. 
She rarely appears these days, 
what with those suitors milling in the hall; 
she keeps to her upper story, weaving at her loom. 
But I'll mention someone else you might just visit: 
Eurymachus, wise Polybus' fine, upstanding son. 
He's the man of the hour! Our island people 
look on him like a god — the prince of suitors, 
hottest to wed my mother, seize my father's powers. 
But god knows — Zeus up there in his bright Olympus — 
whether or not before that wedding day arrives 
he'll bring the day of death on all their heads! ' 
At his last words a bird flew past on the right, 
a hawk, Apollo's wind-swift herald — tight in his claws 
a struggling dove, and he ripped its feathers out 
and they drifted down to earth between the ship 
and the young prince himself ... 
The prophet called him aside, clear of his men, 
and grasped his hand, exclaiming, "Look, Telemachus, 
the will of god just winged that bird on your right! 
Why, the moment 1 saw it, here before my eyes, 
1 knew it was a sign. No line more kingly than yours 
in all of Ithaca — yours^Ni\\ reign forever!" 
"If only, friend," 
alert Telemachus answered, "all you say comes true! 
You'd soon know my affection, know my gifts. 
Any man you meet would call you blest." 
He turned to a trusted friend and said, "Piraeus, 
son of Clytius, you are the one who's done my bidding, 
more than all other friends who sailed with me to Pylos. 
Please, take this guest of mine to your own house, 
treat him kindly, host him with all good will 
till 1 can come myself." 
"Of course, Telemachus," 
Piraeus the gallant spearman offered warmly: 
"Stay up-country just as long as you like. 
I'll tend the man, he'll never lack a lodging. " 
Piraeus boarded ship and told the crew 
to embark at once and cast off cables quickly — 
they swung aboard and sat to the oars in ranks. 
Telemachus fastened rawhide sandals on his feet 
and took from the decks his rugged bronze-tipped spear. 
The men cast off, pushed out and pulled for town 
as Telemachus ordered, King Odysseus' son. 
The prince strode out briskly, 
legs speeding him on till he reached the farm 
where his great droves of pigs crowded their pens 
and the loyal swineherd often slept beside them, 
always the man to serve his masters well. 
Father and Son 
As dawn came into the lodge, the king and loyal swineherd 
set out breakfast, once they had raked the fire up 
and got the herdsmen off with droves of pigs. 
And now Telemachus ... 
the howling dogs went nuzzling up around him, 
not a growl as he approached. From inside 
Odysseus noticed the pack's quiet welcome, 
noticed the light tread of footsteps too 
and turned to Eumaeus quickly, winged a word: 
"Eumaeus, here comes a friend of yours, I'd say. 
Someone you know, at least. The pack's not barking, 
must be fawning around him. 1 can hear his footfall." 
The words were still on his lips when his own son 
stood in the doorway, there. The swineherd started up. 
amazed, he dropped the bowls with a clatter — he'd been busy 
mixing ruddy wine. Straight to the prince he rushed 
and kissed his face and kissed his shining eyes, 
both hands, as the tears rolled down his cheeks. 
As a father, brimming with love, welcomes home 
his darling only son in a warm embrace — 
what pain he's borne for him and him alone! — 
home now, in the tenth year from far abroad, 
so the loyal swineherd hugged the beaming prince, 
he clung for dear life, covering him with kisses, yes, 
like one escaped from death. Eumaeus wept and sobbed, 
his words flew from the heart: "You're home, Telemachus, 
sweet light of my eyes! 1 never thought I'd see you again, 
once you'd shipped to Pylos! Quick, dear boy, come in, 
let me look at you, look to my heart's content — 
under my own roof, the rover home at last. 
You rarely visit the farm and men these days, 
always keeping to town, as if it cheered ^ou 
to see them there, that infernal crowd of suitors! " 
"Have it your way," thoughtful Telemachus replied. 
"Dear old man, it's all for youXhaA. I've come, 
to see you for myself and learn the news — 
whether mother still holds out in the halls 
or some other man has married her at last, 
and Odysseus' bed, 1 suppose, is lying empty, 
blanketed now with filthy cobwebs." 
"Surely," 
the foreman of men responded, "she's still waiting 
there in your halls, poor woman, suffering so, 
her life an endless hardship ... 
wasting away the nights, weeping away the days." 
With that 
he took the bronze spear from the boy, and Telemachus, 
crossing the stone doorsill, went inside the lodge. 
As he approached, his father, Odysseus, rose 
to yield his seat, but the son on his part 
waved him back: "Stay where you are, stranger. 
I know we can find another seat somewhere, 
here on our farm, and here's the man to fetch it." 
So Odysseus, moving back, sat down once more, 
and now for the prince the swineherd strewed a bundle 
of fresh green brushwood, topped it off with sheepskin 
and there the true son of Odysseus took his place. 
Eumaeus set before them platters of roast meat, 
left from the meal he'd had the day before; 
he promptly served them bread, heaped in baskets, 
mixed their hearty wine in a wooden bowl 
and then sat down himself to face the king. 
They reached for the good things that lay at hand, 
and when they 'd put aside desire for food and drink 
Telemachus asked his loyal serving-man at last, 
"Old friend, where does this stranger come from? 
Why did the sailors land him here in Ithaca? 
Who did they say they are? 
1 hardly think he came this way on foot." 
You answered him, Eumaeus, loyal swineherd, 
"Here, my boy, I'll tell you the whole true story. 
He hails from Crete's broad land, he's proud to say, 
but he claims he's drifted round through countless towns of 
roaming the earth ... so a god's spun out his fate. 
He just now broke away from some Thesprotian ship 
and came to my farm. I'll put him in yourhands, 
you tend to him as you like. 
He counts on you, he says, for care and shelter." 
"Shelter? Oh Eumaeus," Telemachus replied, 
"that word of yours, it cuts me to the quick! 
How can 1 lend the stranger refuge in my house? 
I'm young myself. 1 can hardly trust my hands 
to fight off any man who rises up against me. 
Then my mother's wavering, always torn two ways: 
whether to stay with me and care for the household, 
true to her husband's bed, the people's voice as well. 
or leave at long last with the best man in Achaea 
who courts her in the halls, who offers her the most. 
But our new guest, since he's arrived at your house, 
I'll give him a shirt and cloak to wear, good clothing, 
give him a two-edged sword and sandals for his feet 
and send him off, wherever his heart desires. 
Or if you'd rather, keep him here at the farmstead, 
tend to him here, and I'll send up the clothes 
and full rations to keep the man in food; 
he'll be no drain on you and all your men. 
But 1 can't let him go down and join the suitors. 
They're far too abusive, reckless, know no limits: 
they 'll make a mockery of him — that would break my heart. 
It's hard for a man to win his way against a mob, 
even a man of iron. They are much too strong. " 
"Friend " — the long-enduring Odysseus stepped in — 
"surely it's right for me to say a word at this point. 
My heart, by god, is torn to pieces hearing this, 
both of you telling how these reckless suitors, 
there in your own house, against your will, 
plot your ruin — a fine young prince like you. 
Tell me, though, do you /e/^yourself be so abused 
or do people round about, stirred up by the prompting 
of some god, despise you? Or are your brothers at fault? 
Brothers a man can trust to fight beside him, true, 
no matter what deadly blood-feud rages on. 
Would 1 were young as you, to match my spirit now, 
or 1 were the son of great Odysseus, or the king himself 
returned from all his roving — ^there's still room for hope! 
Then let some foreigner lop my head off if 1 failed 
to march right into Odysseus' royal halls 
and kill them all. And what if 1 went down, 
crushed by their numbers — 1, fighting alone? 
I'd rather die, cut down in my own house 
than have to look on at their outrage day by day. 
Guests treated to blows, men dragging the serving-women 
through the noble house, exploiting them all, no shame. 
and the gushing wine swilled, the food squandered — 
gorging for gorging's sake — 
and the courting game goes on, no end in sight! " 
"You're right, my friend, " sober Telemachus agreed. 
"Now let me tell you the whole story, first to last. 
It's not that allom people have turned against me, 
keen for a showdown. Nor have 1 any brothers at fault, 
brothers a man can trust to fight beside him, true, 
no matter what deadly blood-feud rages on ... 
Zeus made our line a line of only sons. 
Arcesius had only one son, Laertes, 
and Laertes had only one son, Odysseus, 
and 1 am Odysseus' only son. He fathered me, 
he left me behind at home, and from me he got no joy. 
So now our house is plagued by swarms of enemies. 
All the nobles who rule the islands round about, 
Dulichion, and Same, and wooded Zacynthus too, 
and all who lord it in rocky Ithaca as well — 
down to the last man they court my mother, 
they lay waste my house! And mother ... 
she neither rejects a marriage she despises 
nor can she bear to bring the courting to an end — 
while they continue to bleed my household white. 
Soon — you wait — ^they'll grind /nedown as well! 
But all lies in the lap of the great gods. 
Eumaeus, 
good old friend, go, quickly, to wise Penelope. 
Tell her I'm home from Pylos safe and sound. 
I'll stay on right here. But you come back 
as soon as you've told the news to her alone. 
No other Achaean must hear — 
all too many plot to take my life." 
"Iknow," 
you assured your prince, Eumaeus, loyal swineherd. 
"1 see your point — ^there's sense in this old head. 
One thing more, and make your orders clear. 
On the same trip do I go and give the news 
to King Laertes too? For many years, poor man, 
heartsick for his son, he'd always keep an eye 
on the farm and take his meals with the hired hands 
whenever he felt the urge to. Now, from the day 
you sailed away to Pylos, not a sip or a bite 
he's touched, they say, not as he did before, 
and his eyes are shut to all the farmyard labors. 
Huddled over, groaning in grief and tears, 
he wastes away — the man's all skin and bones. ' 
"So much the worse, ' Telemachus answered firmly. 
"Leave him alone; though it hurts us now, we must. 
If men could have all they want, free for the taking, 
/(c/take first my father's journey home. So, 
you go and give the message, then come back, 
no roaming over the fields to find Laertes. 
Tell my mother to send her housekeeper, 
fast as she can, in secret — 
she can give the poor old man the news." 
That roused Eumaeus. The swineherd grasped his sandals, 
strapped them onto his feet and made for town. 
His exit did not escape Athena's notice ... 
Approaching, closer, now she appeared a woman, 
beautiful, tall and skilled at weaving lovely things. 
Just at the shelter's door she stopped, visible to Odysseus 
but Telemachus could not see her, sense her there — 
the gods don't show themselves to every man alive. 
Odysseus saw her, so did the dogs; no barking now, 
they whimpered, cringing away in terror through the yard. 
She gave a sign with her brows, Odysseus caught it, 
out of the lodge he went and past the high stockade 
and stood before the goddess. Athena urged him on: 
"Royal son of Laertes, Odysseus, old campaigner, 
now is the time, now tell your son the truth. 
Hold nothing back, so the two of you can plot 
the suitors' doom and then set out for town. 
I myself won't lag behind you long — 
I'm blazing for a battle!" 
Athena stroked him with her golden wand. 
First she made the cloak and shirt on his body 
fresh and clean, then made him taller, supple, young, 
his ruddy tan came back, the cut of his jawline firmed 
and the dark beard clustered black around his chin. 
Her work complete, she went her way once more 
and Odysseus returned to the lodge. His own son 
gazed at him, wonderstruck, terrified too, turning 
his eyes away, suddenly — 
this must be some god — 
and he let fly with a burst of exclamations: 
"Friend, you're a new man — not what 1 saw before! 
Your clothes, they've changed, even your skin has changed — 
surely you are some god who rules the vaulting skies! 
Oh be kind, and we will give you offerings, 
gifts of hammered gold to warm your heart — 
spare us, please, 1 beg you!" 
"No, lam not a god," 
the long-enduring, great Odysseus returned. 
"Why confuse me with one who never dies? 
No, 1 am your father — 
the Odysseus you wept for all your days, 
you bore a world of pain, the cruel abuse of men." 
And with those words Odysseus kissed his son 
and the tears streamed down his cheeks and wet the ground, 
though before he'd always reined his emotions back. 
But still not convinced that it was his father, 
Telemachus broke out, wild with disbelief, 
"No, you're not Odysseus! Not my father! 
Just some spirit spellbinding me now — 
to make me ache with sorrow all the more. 
Impossible for a mortal to work such marvels, 
not with his own devices, not unless some god 
comes down in person, eager to make that mortal 
young or old — like that! Why, just now 
you were old, and wrapped in rags, but now, look, 
you seem like a god who rules the skies up there!" 
"Telemachus, " Odysseus, man of exploits, urged his son, 
"it's wrong to marvel, carried away in wonder so 
at sight of your father here before your eyes. 
No other Odysseus will ever return to you. 
That man and 1 are one, the man you see ... 
here after many hardships, 
endless wanderings, after twenty years 
1 have come home to native ground at last. 
My changing so? Athena's work, the Fighter 's Queen — 
she has that power, she makes me look as she likes, 
now like a beggar, the next moment a young man, 
decked out in handsome clothes about my body. 
It's light work for the gods who rule the skies 
to exalt a mortal man or bring him low. " 
At that 
Odysseus sat down again, and Telemachus threw his arms 
around his great father, sobbing uncontrollably 
as the deep desire for tears welled up in both. 
They cried out, shrilling cries, pulsing sharper 
than birds of prey — eagles, vultures with hooked claws — 
when farmers plunder their nest of young too young to fly. 
Both men so filled with compassion, eyes streaming tears, 
that now the sunlight would have set upon their cries 
if Telemachus had not asked his father, all at once, 
"What sort of ship, dear father, brought you here? — 
Ithaca, at last. Who did the sailors say they are? 
1 hardly think you came back home on foot!" 
So long an exile, great Odysseus replied, 
"Surely, my son, I'll tell you the whole story now. 
Phaeacians brought me here, the famous sailors 
who ferry home all men who reach their shores. 
They sailed me across the sea in their swift ship. 
they set me down in Ithaca, sound asleep, and gave me 
glittering gifts — bronze and hoards of gold and robes. 
All lie stowed in a cave, thanks to the gods' help, 
and Athena's inspiration spurred me here, now, 
so we could plan the slaughter of our foes. 
Come, give me the full tally of these suitors — 
1 must see their numbers, gauge their strength. 
Then I'll deploy this old tactician's wits, 
decide if the two of us can take them on, 
alone, without allies, 
or we should hunt reserves to back us up." 
"Father," 
clear-headed Telemachus countered quickly, 
"all my life I've heard of your great fame — 
a brave man in war and a deep mind in counsel — 
but what you say dumbfounds me, staggers imagination! 
How on earth could two men fight so many and so strong? 
These suitors are not just ten or twenty, they're far more — 
you count them up for yourself now, take a moment ... 
From Dulichion, fifty -two of them, picked young men, 
six servants in their troop; from Same, twenty-four, 
from Zacynthus, twenty Achaeans, nobles all, 
and the twelve best lords from Ithaca itself. 
Medon the herald's with them, a gifted bard, 
and two henchmen, skilled to carve their meat. 
If we pit ourselves against all these in the house, 
1 fear the revenge you come back home to take 
will recoil on our heads — a bitter, deadly blow. 
Think: can you come up with a friend-in-arms? 
Some man to fight beside us, some brave heart?" 
"Let me tell you," the old soldier said, 
"bear it in mind now, listen to me closely. 
Think:^N\\\ Athena flanked by Father Zeus 
do for the two of us? 
Or shall 1 rack my brains for another champion?" 
Telemachus answered shrewdly, full of poise. 
"Two great champions, those you name, it's true. 
Off in the clouds they sit 
and they lord it over gods and mortal men. " 
"Trust me, " his seasoned father reassured him, 
" tIley^Non't hold off long from the cries and clash of battle, 
not when we and the suitors put our fighting strength 
to proof in my own halls! But now, with daybreak, 
home you go and mix with that overbearing crowd. 
The swineherd will lead me into the city later, 
looking old and broken, a beggar once again. 
If they abuse me in the palace, steel yourself, 
no matter what outrage 1 must suffer, even 
if they drag me through our house by the heels 
and throw me out or pelt me with things they hurl — 
you just look on, endure it. Prompt them to quit 
their wild reckless ways, try to win them over 
with friendly words. Those men will never listen, 
now the day of doom is hovering at their heads. 
One more thing. Take it to heart, 1 urge you. 
When Athena, Queen of Tactics, tells me it is time, 
I'll give you a nod, and when you catch that signal 
round up all the deadly weapons kept in the hall, 
stow them away upstairs in a storeroom's deep recess — 
all the arms and armor — and when the suitors miss them 
and ask you questions, put them off with a winning story: 
'1 stowed them away, clear of the smoke. A far cry 
from the arms Odysseus left when he went to Troy, 
fire-damaged equipment, black with reeking fumes. 
And a god reminded me of something darker too. 
When you're in your cups a quarrel might break out, 
you'd wound each other, shame your feasting here 
and cast a pall on your courting. 
Iron has powers to draw a man to ruin.' 
Just you leave 
a pair of swords for the two of us, a pair of spears 
and a pair of oxhide bucklers right at hand so we 
can break for the weapons, seize them! Then Athena, 
Zeus in his wisdom — they will daze the suitors' wits. 
Now one last thing. Bear it in mind. You must. 
If you are my own true son, born of my blood, 
let no one hear that Odysseus has come home. 
Don't let Laertes know, not Eumaeus either, 
none in the household, not Penelope herself. 
You and 1 alone will assess the women's mood 
and we might test a few of the serving-men as well: 
where are the ones who still respect us both, 
who hold us in awe? And who shirk their duties? — 
slighting you because you are so young." 
"Soon enough, father, " his gallant son replied, 
"you'll sense the courage inside me, that 1 know — 
I'm hardly a flighty, weak-willed boy these days. 
But 1 think your last plan would gain us nothing. 
Reconsider, 1 urge you. 
You'll waste time, roaming around our holdings, 
probing the fieldhands man by man, while the suitors 
sit at ease in our house, devouring all our goods — 
those brazen rascals never spare a scrap! 
But 1 do advise you to sound the women out: 
who are disloyal to you, who are guiltless? 
The men — 1 say no to testing them farm by farm. 
That's work for later, if you have really seen 
a sign from Zeus whose shield is storm and thunder. " 
Now as father and son conspired, shaping plans, 
the ship that brought the prince and shipmates back 
from Pylos was just approaching Ithaca, home port. 
As soon as they put in to the harbor's deep bay 
they hauled the black vessel up onto dry land 
and eager deckhands bore away their gear 
and rushed the priceless gifts to Clytius' house. 
But they sent a herald on to Odysseus' halls at once 
to give the news to thoughtful, cautious Penelope 
that Telemachus was home— just up-country now, 
but he'd told his mates to sail across to port — 
so the noble queen would not be seized with fright 
and break down in tears. And now those two men met, 
herald and swineherd, both out on the same errand, 
to give the queen the news. But once they reached 
the house of the royal king the herald strode up, 
into the serving-women's midst, and burst out, 
"Your beloved son, my queen, is home at last!" 
Eumaeus though, bending close to Penelope, 
whispered every word that her dear son 
entrusted him to say. Message told in full, 
he left the halls and precincts, heading for his pigs. 
But the news shook the suitors, dashed their spirits. 
Out of the halls they crowded, past the high-walled court 
and there before the gates they sat in council. 
Poly bus' son Eurymachus opened up among them: 
"Friends, what a fine piece of work he's carried off! 
Telemachus — what insolence — and we thought his little jaunt 
would come to grief! Up now, launch a black ship, 
the best we can find — muster a crew of oarsmen, 
row the news to our friends in ambush, fast, 
bring them back at once. " 
And just then — 
he'd not quite finished when Amphinomus, 
wheeling round in his seat, 
saw their vessel moored in the deep harbor, 
their comrades striking sail and hoisting oars. 
He broke into heady laughter, called his friends: 
"No need for a message now. They're home, look there! 
Some god gave them the news, or they saw the prince's ship 
go sailing past and failed to overtake her." 
Rising, all trooped down to the water's edge 
as the crew hauled the vessel up onto dry land 
and the hot-blooded hands bore off their gear. 
Then in a pack they went to the meeting grounds, 
suffering no one else, young or old, to sit among them. 
Eupithes' son Antinous rose and harangued them all: 
"What a blow! See how the gods have saved this boy 
from bloody death? And our lookouts all day long, 
stationed atop the windy heights, kept watch, 
shift on shift; and once the sun went down 
we'd never sleep the night ashore, never, 
always aboard our swift ship, cruising till dawn, 
patrolling to catch Telemachus, kill him on the spot, 
and all the while some spirit whisked him home! 
So here at home^Ne'\\ plot his certain death: 
he must never slip through our hands again, 
that boy — while he still lives, 
1 swear we'll never bring our venture off. 
The clever little schemer, he does have his skills, 
and the crowds no longer show us favor, not at all. 
So act! before he can gather his people in assembly. 
He'll never give in an inch, 1 know, he'll rise 
and rage away, shouting out to them all how we, 
we schemed his sudden death but never caught him. 
Hearing of our foul play, they'll hardly sing our praises. 
Why, they might do us damage, run us off our lands, 
drive us abroad to hunt for strangers' shores. 
Strike first, 1 say, and kill him! — 
clear of town, in the fields or on the road. 
Then we'll seize his estates and worldly goods, 
carve them up between us, share and share alike. 
But as for his palace, let his mother keep it, 
she and the man she weds. 
There's my plan. 
If you find it offensive, if you want him 
living on — in full command of his patrimony — 
gather here no more then, living the life of kings, 
consuming all his wealth. Each from his own house 
must try to win her, showering her with gifts- 
Then she can marry the one who offers most, 
the man marked out by fate to be her husband." 
That brought them all to a hushed, stunned silence 
till Amphinomus rose to have his say among them — 
the noted son of Nisus, King Aretias' grandson, 
the chief who led the suitors from DuUchion, 
land of grass and grains, 
and the man who pleased Penelope the most, 
thanks to his timely words and good clear sense. 
Concerned for their welfare now, he stood and argued: 
"Friends, I've no desire to kill Telemachus, not 1 — 
it's a terrible thing to shed the blood of kings. 
Wait, sound out the will of the gods — that first. 
If the decrees of mighty Zeus commend the work, 
I'll kill the prince myself and spur on all the rest. 
If the gods are against it, then 1 say hold back!" 
So Amphinomus urged, and won them over. 
They rose at once, returned to Odysseus' palace, 
entered and took their seats on burnished chairs. 
But now an inspiration took the discreet Penelope 
to face her suitors, brutal, reckless men. 
The queen had heard it all ... 
how they plotted inside the house to kill her son. 
The herald Medon told her — he'd overheard their schemes. 
And so, flanked by her ladies, she descended to the hall. 
That luster of women, once she reached her suitors, 
drawing her glistening veil across her cheeks, 
paused now where a column propped the sturdy roof 
and wheeling on Antinous, cried out against him: 
"You, Antinous! Violent, vicious, scheming — 
you, they say, are the best man your age in Ithaca, 
best for eloquence, counsel. You're nothing of the sort! 
Madman, why do you weave destruction for Telemachus? — 
show no pity to those who need it? — ^those over whom 
almighty Zeus stands guard. It's wrong, unholy, yes, 
weaving death for those who deserve your mercy! 
Don't you know how your fatAerfied here once? 
A fugitive, terrified of the people, up in arms 
against him because he'd joined some Taphian pirates 
out to attack Thesprotians, sworn allies of ours. 
The mobs were set to destroy him, rip his hfe out, 
devour his vast wealth to their heart's content, 
but Odysseus held them back, he kept their fury down. 
And thisis the man whose house you waste, scot-free, 
whose wife you court, whose son you mean to kill — 
you make my life an agony! Stop, 1 tell you, 
stop all this, and make the rest stop too!" 
But Polybus' son Eurymachus tried to calm her: 
"Wise Penelope, daughter of Icarius, courage! 
Disabuse yourself of all these worries now. 
That man is not alive — 
he never will be, he never can be born — 
who'll lift a hand against Telemachus, your son, 
not while /walk the land and 1 can see the light. 
1 tell you this — so help me, it will all come true — 
in an instant that man's blood will spurt around my spear! 
Mz/ spear, since time and again Odysseus dandled me 
on his knees, the great raider of cities fed me 
roasted meat and held the red wine to my lips. 
So to /neyour son is the dearest man alive, 
and 1 urge the boy to have no fear of death, 
not from the suitors at least. 
What comes from the gods — ^there's no escaping that." 
Encouraging, all the way, but all the while 
plotting the prince's murder in his mind ... 
The queen, going up to her lofty well-lit room, 
fell to weeping for Odysseus, her beloved husband, 
till watchful Athena sealed her eyes with welcome sleep. 
Returning just at dusk to Odysseus and his son, 
the loyal swineherd found they'd killed a yearling pig 
and standing over it now were busy fixing supper. 
But Athena had approached Laertes' son Odysseus, 
tapped him with her wand and made him old again. 
She dressed him in filthy rags too, for fear Eumaeus, 
recognizing his master face-to-face, might hurry 
back to shrewd Penelope, blurting out the news 
and never hide the secret in his heart. 
Telemachus was the first to greet the swineherd: 
"Welcome home, my friend! What's the talk in town? 
Are the swaggering suitors back from ambush yet — 
or still waiting to catch me coming home?" 
You answered the prince, Eumaeus, loyal swineherd, 
"1 had no time to go roaming all through town, 
digging round for that. My heart raced me on 
to get my message told and rush back here. 
But 1 met up with a fast runner there, 
sent by your crew, a herald, 
first to tell your mother all the news. 
And this 1 know, 1 saw with my own eyes — 
1 was just above the city, heading home, 
clambering over Hermes' Ridge, when 1 caught sight 
of a trim ship pulling into the harbor, loaded down 
with a crowd aboard her, shields and two-edged spears. 
1 thinkXhe^'TQ the men you're after — I'm not sure." 
At that the young prince Telemachus smiled, 
glancing toward his father, avoiding Eumaeus' eyes. 
And now, 
with the roasting done, the meal set out, they ate well 
and no one's hunger lacked a proper share of supper. 
When they'd put aside desire for food and drink, 
they remembered bed and took the gift of sleep. 
Stranger at 
the Gates 
when young Dawn with her rose-red fingers shone once more 
Telemachus strapped his rawhide sandals to his feet 
and the young prince, the son of King Odysseus, 
picked up the rugged spear that fit his grip 
and striking out for the city, told his swineherd, 
"I'm off to town, old friend, to present myself to mother. 
She'll never stop her bitter tears and mourning, 
well 1 know, till she sees me face-to-face. 
And for you 1 have some orders — 
take this luckless stranger to town, so he can beg 
his supper there, and whoever wants can give the man 
some crumbs and a cup to drink. How can /put up with 
every passerby? My mind's weighed down with troubles. 
If the stranger resents it, all the worse for him. 
1 like to tell the truth and tell it straight." 
"My friend, 
subtle Odysseus broke in, "I've no desire, myself, 
to linger here. Better that beggars cadge their meals 
in town than in the fields. Some willing soul 
will see to my needs. I'm hardly fit, at my age, 
to keep to a farm and jump to a foreman's every order. 
Go on then. This man will take me, as you've told him, 
once I'm warm from the fire and the sun's good and strong. 
Look at the clothing on my back — all rags and tatters. 
I'm afraid the frost at dawn could do me in, 
and town, you say, is a long hard way from here." 
At that Telemachus strode down through the farm 
in quick, firm strides, brooding death for the suitors. 
And once he reached his well-constructed palace, 
propping his spear against a sturdy pillar 
and crossing the stone threshold, in he went. 
His old nurse was the first to see him, Eurycleia, 
just spreading fleeces over the carved, inlaid chairs. 
Tears sprang to her eyes, she rushed straight to the prince 
as the other maids of great Odysseus flocked around him, 
hugged him warmly, kissed his head and shoulders. 
Now down from her chamber came discreet Penelope, 
looking for all the world like Artemis or golden Aphrodite — 
bursting into tears as she flung her arms around her darling son 
and kissed his face and kissed his shining eyes and sobbed, 
"You're home, Telemachus!" — ^words flew from her heart — 
"sweet light of my eyes! 1 never thought I'd see you again, 
once you shipped to Pylos — against my will, so secret, 
out for news of your dear father. Quick tell me, 
did you catch sight of the man — meet him — ^what?" 
"Please, mother," steady Telemachus replied, 
"don't move me to tears, don't stir the heart inside me. 
I've just escaped from death. Sudden death. 
No. Bathe now, put on some fresh clothes. 
go up to your own room with your serving-women, 
pray, and promise the gods a generous sacrifice 
to bring success, if Zeus will ever grant us 
the hour of our revenge. I myself am off 
to the meeting grounds to summon up a guest 
who came with me from abroad when 1 sailed home. 
1 sent him on ahead with my trusted crew. 
1 told Piraeus to take him to his house, 
treat him well, host him with all good will 
till 1 could come myself." 
Words to the mark 
that left his mother silent ... 
She bathed now, put on some fresh clothes, 
prayed, and promised the gods a generous sacrifice 
to bring success, if Zeus would ever grant 
the hour of their revenge. 
Spear in hand, 
Telemachus strode on through the hall and out, 
and a pair of sleek hounds went trotting at his heels. 
And Athena lavished a marvelous splendor on the prince 
so the people all gazed in wonder as he came forward. 
The swaggering suitors clustered, milling round him, 
welcome words on their lips, and murder in their hearts. 
But he gave them a wide berth as they came crowding in 
and there where Mentor sat, Antiphus, Halitherses too — 
his father's loyal friends from the early days — 
he took his seat as they pressed him with their questions. 
And just then Piraeus the gallant spearman approached, 
leading the stranger through the town and out onto 
the meeting grounds. Telemachus, not hanging back, 
went right up to greet Theoclymenus, his guest, 
but Piraeus spoke out first: "Quickly now, 
Telemachus, send some women to my house 
to retrieve the gifts that Menelaus gave you." 
"Wait, Piraeus," wary Telemachus cautioned, 
"we've no idea how all of this will go. 
If the brazen suitors cut me down in the palace — 
off guard — and carve apart my father's whole estate, 
I'd rather you yourself, or one of his friends here, 
keep those gifts and get some pleasure from them. 
But if 1 can bring down slaughter on that crew, 
you send the gifts to my house — we'll share the joy." 
Their plans made, he led the wayworn stranger home 
and once they reached the well-constructed palace, 
spreading out their cloaks on a chair or bench, 
into the burnished tubs they climbed and bathed. 
When women had washed them, rubbed them down with oil 
and drawn warm fleece and shirts around their shoulders, 
out of the baths they stepped and sat on high-backed chairs. 
A maid brought water soon in a graceful golden pitcher 
and over a silver basin tipped it out 
so they might rinse their hands, 
then pulled a gleaming table to their side. 
A staid housekeeper brought on bread to serve them, 
appetizers aplenty too, lavish with her bounty. 
Penelope sat across from her son, beside a pillar, 
leaning back on a low chair and winding finespun yarn. 
They reached out for the good things that lay at hand 
and when they'd put aside desire for food and drink, 
the queen, for all her composure, said at last, 
"Telemachus, I'm going back to my room upstairs 
and lie down on my bed ... 
that bed of pain my tears have streaked, year in, 
year out, from the day Odysseus sailed away to Troy 
with Atreus' two sons. 
But you, you never had the heart — 
before those insolent suitors crowd back to the house — 
to tell me clearly about your father's journey home, 
if you've heard any news." 
"Of course, mother," 
thoughtful Telemachus reassured her quickly, 
"1 will tell you the whole true story now. 
We sailed to Pylos, to Nestor, the great king, 
and he received me there in his lofty palace, 
treated me well and warmly, yes, as a father treats 
a long-lost son just home from voyaging, years abroad: 
such care he showered on me, he and his noble sons. 
But of strong, enduring Odysseus, dead or alive, 
he's heard no news, he said, from any man on earth. 
He sent me on to the famous spearman Atrides Menelaus, 
on with a team of horses drawing a bolted chariot. 
And there 1 saw her, Helen of Argos — all for her 
Achaeans and Trojans suffered so much hardship, 
thanks to the gods' decree ... 
The lord of the warcry , Menelaus, asked at once 
what pressing need had brought me to lovely Lacedaemon, 
and when 1 told him the whole story, first to last, 
the king burst out, 'How shameful! That's the bed 
of a brave man of war they'd like to crawl inside, 
those spineless, craven cowards! 
Weak as the doe that beds down her fawns 
in a mighty lion's den — her newborn sucklings — 
then trails off to the mountain spurs and grassy bends 
to graze her fill, but back the lion comes to his own lair 
and the master deals both fawns a ghastly bloody death, 
just what Odysseus will deal that mob — ghastly death. 
Ah if only — Father Zeus, Athena and lord Apollo — 
that man who years ago in the games at Lesbos 
rose to Philomelides' challenge, wrestled him, 
pinned him down with one tremendous throw 
and the Argives roared with joy ... 
if only ^Aa^ Odysseus sported with those suitors, 
a blood wedding, a quick death would take the lot! 
But about the things you've asked me, so intently, 
I'll skew and sidestep nothing, not deceive you, ever. 
Of all Aetold me — ^the Old Man of the Sea who never lies — 
I'll hide or hold back nothing, not a single word. 
He said he'd seen Odysseus on an island, 
ground down in misery, off in a goddess' house, 
the nymph Calypso, who holds him there by force. 
He has no way to voyage home to his own native land, 
no trim ships in reach, no crew to ply the oars 
and send him scudding over the sea's broad back.' 
So Menelaus, the famous spearman, told me. 
My mission accomplished, back 1 came at once, 
and the gods sent me a stiff following wind 
that sped me home to the native land 1 love. ' 
His reassurance stirred the queen to her depths 
and the godUke seer Theocly menus added firmly, 
"Noble lady, wife of Laertes' son, Odysseus, 
Menelaus can have no perfect revelations; 
mark myyNords — 1 will make you a prophecy, 
quite precise, and /U hold nothing back. 
1 swear by Zeus, the first of all the gods, 
by this table of hospitality here, my host, 
by Odysseus' hearth where 1 have come for help — 
1 swear Odysseus Js on native soil, here and now! 
Poised or on the prowl, learning of these rank crimes 
he's sowing seeds of ruin for all your suitors. 
So clear, so true, that bird-sign 1 saw 
as 1 sat on the benched ship 
and sounded out the future to the prince!" 
"If only, my friend," reserved Penelope exclaimed, 
"everything you say would come to pass! 
You'd soon know my affection, know my gifts. 
Any man you meet would call you blest." 
And so the three confided in the halls 
while all the suitors, before Odysseus' palace, 
amused themselves with discus and long throwing spears, 
out on the leveled grounds, free and easy as always, 
full of swagger. When the dinner-hour approached 
and sheep came home from pastures near and far. 
driven in by familiar drovers, 
Medon called them all, their favorite herald, 
always present at their meals: "My young lords, 
now you've played your games to your hearts' content, 
come back to the halls so we can fix your supper. 
Nothing's better than dining well on time!" 
They came at his summons, rising from the games 
and now, bustling into the well-constructed palace, 
flinging down their cloaks on a chair or bench, 
they butchered hulking sheep and fatted goats, 
full-grown hogs and a young cow from the herd, 
preparing for their feast. 
At the same time 
the king and his loyal swineherd geared to leave 
the country for the town. Eumaeus, foreman of men, 
set things in motion: "Friend, 1 know you're keen 
on going down to town today , just as my master bid, 
though I'd rather you stay here to guard the farm. 
But 1 prize the boy, 1 fear he'll blame me later — 
a dressing-down from your master's hard to bear. 
So off we go now. The shank of the day is past. 
You'll find it colder with nightfall coming on." 
"1 know, 1 see your point," the crafty man replied. 
"There's sense in this old head. So let's be off. 
And from now on, you lead me all the way. 
Just give me a stick to lean on, 
if you have one ready-cut. You say the road 
is treacherous, full of slips and slides." 
With that 
he flung his beggar's sack across his shoulders — 
torn and tattered, slung from a fraying rope. 
Eumaeus gave him a staff that met his needs. 
Then the two moved out, leaving behind them 
dogs and herdsmen to stay and guard the farm. 
And so the servant led his master toward the city, 
looking for all the world like an old and broken beggar 
hunched on a stick, his body wrapped in shameful rags ... 
Down over the rugged road they went till hard by town 
they reached the stone-rimmed fountain running clear 
where the city people came and drew their water. 
Ithacus built it once, with Neritus and Polyctor. 
Round it a stand of poplar thrived on the dank soil, 
all in a nestling ring, and down from a rock-ledge overhead 
the cold water splashed, and crowning the fountain 
rose an altar-stone erected to the nymphs, 
where every traveler paused and left an offering. 
Here Dolius' son, Melanthius, crossed their path, 
herding his goats with a pair of drovers' help, 
the pick of his flocks to make the suitors' meal. 
As soon as he saw them there he broke into a flood 
of brutal, foul abuse that made Odysseus' blood boil. 
"Look! " — he sneered — "one scum nosing another scum along, 
dirt finds dirt by the will of god — it never fails! 
Stinking pig-boy, where do you take your filthy swine, 
this sickening beggar who licks the pots at feasts? 
Hanging round the doorposts, rubbing his back, 
scavenging after scraps, 
no hero's swords and cauldrons, not for him. 
Hand him over to me — I'll teach him to work a farm, 
muck out my stalls, pitch feed to the young goats; 
whey to drink will put some muscle on his hams! 
Oh no, he's learned his lazy ways too well, 
he's got no itch to stick to good hard work, 
he'd rather go scrounging round the countryside, 
begging for crusts to stuff his greedy gut! 
Let me tell you — so help me it's the truth — 
if he sets foot in King Odysseus' royal palace, 
salvos of footstools flung at his head by all the lords 
will crack his ribs as he runs the line of fire through the house!" 
Wild, reckless taunts — and just as he passed Odysseus 
the idiot lurched out with a heel and kicked his hip, 
but he couldn't knock the beggar off the path. 
he stood his ground so staunchly. Odysseus was torn ... 
should he wheel with his staff and beat the scoundrel senseless? — 
or hoist him by the midriff, split his skull on the rocks? 
He steeled himself instead, his mind in full control. 
But Eumaeus glared at the goatherd, cursed him to his face, 
then lifted up his hands and prayed his heart out: 
"0 nymphs of the fountain, daughters of Zeus — 
if Odysseus ever burned you the long thighs 
of lambs or kids, covered with rich fat, 
now bring my prayer to pass! 
Let that man come back — some god guide him now! 
He'd toss to the winds the flashy show you make, 
Melanthius, so cocksure — always strutting round the town 
while worthless fieldhands leave your flocks a shambles!" 
"Listen to /limf the goatherd shouted back. 
"All bark and no bite from the vicious mutt! 
One fine day I'll ship him out in a black lugger, 
miles from Ithaca — sell him off for a good stiff price! 
Just let Apollo shoot Telemachus down with his silver bow, 
today in the halls, or the suitors snuff his life out — 
as sure as 1 know the day of the king's return 
is blotted out, the king is worlds away!" 
With his parting shot he left them trudging on 
and went and reached the royal house in no time. 
Slipping in, he took his seat among the suitors, 
facing Eurymachus, who favored him the most. 
The carvers set before him his plate of meat, 
a staid housekeeper brought the man his bread. 
And now at last the king and loyal swineherd, 
drawing near the palace, halted just outside 
as the lyre's rippling music drifted round them — 
Phemius, striking up a song for assembled guests — 
and the master seized his servant's hand, exclaiming, 
"Friend, what a noble house! Odysseus 'house, it must be! 
No mistaking it — you could tell it among a townful, look. 
One building linked to the next, and the courtyard wall 
is finished off with a fine coping, the double doors 
are battle-proof — no man could break them down! 
1 can tell a crowd is feasting there in force — 
smell the savor of roasts ... the ringing lyre, listen, 
the lyre that god has made the friend of feasts. " 
"An easy guess," you said, Eumaeus, swineherd, 
"for a man as keen as you at every turn. 
Put heads together. What do we do next? 
Either you're the first one into the palace — 
mix with the suitors, leave me where 1 am. 
Or if you like, stay put, and I'll go first myself. 
Don't linger long. Someone might spot you here outside, 
knock you down or pelt you. Mark my words. Take care." 
The man who'd borne long years abroad replied, 
"Well 1 know. Remember? There's sense in this old head. 
You go in, you first, while 1 stay here behind. 
Stones and blows and 1 are hardly strangers. 
My heart is steeled by now, 
I've had my share of pain in the waves and wars. 
Add this to the total. Bring the trial on. 
But there's no way to hide the belly's hungers — 
what a curse, what mischief it brews in all our lives! 
Just for hunger we rig and ride our long benched ships 
on the barren salt sea, speeding death to enemies." 
Now, as they talked on, a dog that lay there 
lifted up his muzzle, pricked his ears ... 
It was Argos, long-enduring Odysseus' dog 
he trained as a puppy once, but little joy he got 
since all too soon he shipped to sacred Troy. 
In the old days young hunters loved to set him 
coursing after the wild goats and deer and hares. 
But now with his master gone he lay there, castaway, 
on piles of dung from mules and cattle, heaps collecting 
out before the gates till Odysseus' serving-men 
could cart it off to manure the king's estates. 
Infested with ticks, half -dead from neglect, 
here lay the hound, old Argos. 
But the moment he sensed Odysseus standing by 
he thumped his tail, nuzzling low, and his ears dropped, 
though he had no strength to drag himself an inch 
toward his master. Odysseus glanced to the side 
and flicked away a tear, hiding it from Eumaeus, 
diverting his friend in a hasty, offhand way: 
"Strange, Eumaeus, look, a dog like this, 
lying here on a dung-hill ... 
what handsome lines! But 1 can't say for sure 
if he had the running speed to match his looks 
or he was only the sort that gentry spoil at table, 
show-dogs masters pamper for their points." 
You told the stranger, Eumaeus, loyal swineherd, 
"Here — it's all too true — here's the dog of a man 
who died in foreign parts. But if he had now 
the form and flair he had in his glory days — 
as Odysseus left him, sailing off to Troy — 
you'd be amazed to see such speed, such strength. 
No quarry he chased in the deepest, darkest woods 
could ever slip this hound. A champion tracker too! 
Ah, but he's run out of luck now, poor fellow ... 
his master's dead and gone, so far from home, 
and the heartless women tend him not at all. Slaves, 
with their lords no longer there to crack the whip, 
lose all zest to perform their duties well. Zeus, 
the Old Thunderer, robs a man of half his virtue 
the day the yoke clamps down around his neck." 
With that he entered the well-constructed palace, 
strode through the halls and joined the proud suitors. 
But the dark shadow of death closed down on Argos' eyes 
the instant he saw Odysseus, twenty years away. 
Now Prince Telemachus, first by far to note 
the swineherd coming down the hall, nodded briskly, 
called and waved him on. Eumaeus, glancing about, 
picked up a handy stool where the carver always sat, 
slicing meat for the suitors feasting through the house. 
He took and put it beside the prince's table, facing him, 
straddled it himself as a steward set a plate of meat 
before the man and served him bread from trays. 
Right behind him came Odysseus, into his own house, 
looking for all the world like an old and broken beggar 
hunched on a stick, his body wrapped in shameful rags. 
Just in the doorway , just at the ashwood threshold, 
there he settled down ... 
leaning against the cypress post a master joiner 
planed smooth and hung with a plumb line gears ago. 
Telemachus motioned the swineherd over now, 
and choosing a whole loaf from a fine wicker tray 
and as much meat as his outstretched hands could hold, 
he said, "Now take these to the stranger, tell him too 
to make the rounds of the suitors, beg from one and all. 
Bashfulness, for a man in need, is no great friend." 
And Eumaeus did his bidding, went straight up 
to the guest and winged a greeting: "Here, stranger. 
Prince Telemachus sends you these, and tells you too 
to make the rounds of the suitors, beg from one and all. 
Bashfulness for a beggar, he says, is no great friend." 
"Powerful Zeus!" the crafty king responded, 
"grant that your prince be blest among mankind — 
and all his heart's desires come to pass!" 
Taking the food in both hands, setting it down, 
spread out on his filthy sack before his feet, 
the beggar fell to his meal 
as the singer raised a song throughout the house. 
Once he'd supped and the stirring bard had closed, 
the suitors broke into uproar down along the hall. 
And now Athena came to the side of Laertes' royal son 
and urged him, "Go now, gather crusts from all the suitors, 
test them, so we can tell the innocent from the guilty." 
But not even so would Athena save one man from death. 
Still, off he went, begging from each in turn, 
circUng left to right, reaching out his hand 
like a beggar from the day that he was born. 
They pitied him, gave him scraps, were puzzled too, 
asking each other, "Who is this? " "Where's he from?" 
Till the goatherd Melanthius shouted out in their midst, 
"Listen to me, you lords who court our noble queen — 
I'll tell you about the stranger. I've seen him before. 
1 know for a fact the swineherd led him in, 
though 1 have no idea who the fellow is 
or where he thinks he comes from." 
At that 
Antinous wheeled on Eumaeus, lashing out at him: 
"Your highness, swineherd — why drag this\.o town? 
Haven't we got our share of vagabonds to deal with, 
disgusting beggars who lick the feasters' plates? 
Isn't it quite enough, these swarming crowds 
consuming your master's bounty — 
must you invite this rascal in the bargain?" 
"Antinous, 
highborn as you are," you told the man, Eumaeus, 
"that was a mean low speech! 
Now who'd go out, who on his own hook — 
not 1 — and ask a stranger in from nowhere 
unless he had some skills to serve the house? 
A prophet, a healer who cures disease, a worker in wood 
or even a god-inspired bard whose singing warms the heart — 
they'reXhe ones asked in around the world. A beggar? 
Who'd invite a beggar to bleed his household white? 
You, you of all the suitors are always roughest 
on the servants of our king, on memosl of all. 
Not that 1 care, no, so long as his queen, 
his wise queen, is still alive in the palace, 
Prince Telemachus too." 
"Stop, Eumaeus," 
poised Telemachus broke in quickly now, 
"don't waste so much breath on Antinous here. 
It's just his habit to bait a man with abuse 
and spur the rest as well. " 
He wheeled on the suitor, 
letting loose: "How kind you are to me, Antinous, 
kind as a father to his son! Encouraging me 
to send this stranger packing from my house 
with a harsh command! I'd never do it. God forbid. 
Take and give to the beggar. 1 don't grudge it — 
I'd even urge you on. No scruples now, 
never fear your gifts will upset my mother 
or any servant in King Odysseus' royal house. 
But no such qualm could enter that head of yours, 
bent on feeding your own face, not feeding strangers!" 
Antinous countered the young prince in kind: 
"So high and mighty, Telemachus — such unbridled rage! 
If all the suitors gave him the sort of gift I'll give, 
the house would be rid of him for three whole months!" 
With that from under his table be seized the stool 
that propped his smooth feet as he reveled on — 
just lifting it into view ... 
But as for the rest, 
all gave to the beggar, filled his sack with handouts, 
bread and meat. And Odysseus seemed at the point 
of getting back to his doorsill, 
done with testing suitors, home free himself 
when he stopped beside Antinous, begging face-to-face: 
"Give me a morsel, friend. You're hardly the worst 
Achaean here, it seems. The noblest one, in fact. 
You look like a king to me! 
So you should give a bigger crust than the rest 
and 1 will sing your praises all across the earth. 
1 too once lived in a lofty house that men admired; 
rolling in wealth, I'd often give to a vagabond like myself, 
whoever he was, whatever need had brought him to my door. 
And crowds of servants 1 had, and lots of all it takes 
to live the life of ease, to make men call you rich. 
But Zeus ruined it all — god's will, no doubt — 
when he shipped me off with a roving band of pirates 
bound for Egypt, a long hard sail, to wreck my life. 
There in the Nile delta 1 moored our ships of war. 
God knows 1 ordered my trusty crews to stand by, 
just where they were, and guard the anchored fleet 
and 1 sent a patrol to scout things out from higher ground. 
But swept away by their own reckless fury, the crew went berserk — 
they promptly began to plunder the lush Egyptian farms, 
dragged off the women and children, killed the men. 
Outcries reached the city in no time — stirred by shouts 
the entire town came streaming down at the break of day, 
filling the river plain with chariots, ranks of infantry 
and the gleam of bronze. Zeus who loves the lightning 
flung down murderous panic on all my men-at-arms — 
no one dared to stand his ground and fight, 
disaster ringed us round from every quarter. 
Droves of my men they hacked down with swords, 
led off the rest alive, to labor for them as slaves. 
Myself? They passed me on to a stranger come their way, 
to ship me to Cyprus — lasus' son Dmetor it was, 
who ruled Cyprus then with an iron fist. 
And from there 1 sailed to Ithaca, 
just as you see me now, ground down by pain and sorrow — " 
"Good god almighty!" Antinous cut the beggar short. 
"What spirit brought this pest to plague our feast? 
Back off! Into the open, clear of my table, or you, 
you'll soon land in an Egypt, Cyprus, to break your heart! 
What a brazen, shameless beggar! Scrounging food 
from each man in turn, and look at their handouts, 
reckless, never a qualm, no holding back, not 
when making free with the next man's goods — 
each one's got plenty here." 
"Pity, pity," 
the wry Odysseus countered, drawing away. 
"No sense in your head to match your handsome looks. 
You'd grudge your servant a pinch of salt from your own larder, 
you who lounge at the next man's board but lack the heart 
to tear a crust of bread and hand it on to me, 
though there's god's plenty here." 
Boiling over 
Antinous gave him a scathing look and let fly, 
"Now^ou won't get out of the hall unscarred, 1 swear, 
not after such a filthy string of insults!" 
With that 
he seized the stool and hurled it — 
Square in the back 
it struck Odysseus, just under the right shoulder 
but he stood up against it — steady as a rock, 
unstaggered by Antinous' blow— just shook his head, 
silent, his mind churning with thoughts of bloody work. 
Back he went to the doorsill, crouched, and setting down 
his sack about to burst, he faced the suitors, saying, 
"Hear me out, you lords who court the noble queen, 
1 must say what the heart inside me urges. 
There's nothing to groan about, no hurt, when a man 
takes a blow as he fights to save his own possessions, 
cattle or shining flocks. But Antinous struck me 
all because of my good-for-nothing belly — that, 
that curse that makes such pain for us poor men. 
But if beggars have their gods and Furies too, 
let Antinous meet his death before he meets his bride!" 
"Enough, stranger!" Antinous volleyed back. 
"Sit there and eat in peace — or go get lost! Or else, 
for the way you talk, these young men will hale you 
up and down the halls by your hands or feet 
until you're skinned alive!" 
Naked threats — 
but the rest were outraged, even those brash suitors. 
One would say to another, "Look, Antinous, 
that was a crime, to strike the luckless beggar!" 
"Your fate is sealed if he's some god from the blue. " 
"And the gods do take on the look of strangers 
dropping in from abroad — " 
"Disguised in every way 
as they roam and haunt our cities, watching over us — " 
"All our foul play, all our fair play too!" 
So they warned, but Antinous paid no heed. 
And the anguish welled up in Telemachus' breast 
for the blow his father took, yet he let no tears 
go rolling down his face — just shook his head, 
silent, his mind churning with thoughts of bloody work. 
But then, when cautious Queen Penelope heard 
how Antinous struck the stranger, there in the halls, 
she cried out, with her serving-women round her, 
"May Apollo the Archer strike you just as hard!" 
And her housekeeper Eurynome added quickly, 
"If only our prayers were granted — 
then not one of the lot would live to see 
Dawn climb her throne tomorrow!" 
"Dear old woman," 
alert Penelope replied, "they're all hateful, 
plotting their vicious plots. But Antinous 
is the worst of all — he's black death itself. 
Here's this luckless stranger, wandering down 
the halls and begging scraps — hard-pressed by need — 
and the rest all give the man his fill of food, 
but that one gives him a footstool 
hurled at his right shoulder, hits his back!" 
While she exclaimed among her household women, 
sitting there in her room, Odysseus bent to supper. 
Penelope called the swineherd in and gave instructions: 
"Go, good Eumaeus, tell the stranger to come at once. 
I'd like to give him a warm welcome, ask the man 
if he's heard some news about my gallant husband 
or seen him in the flesh ... 
He seems like one who's roved around the world." 
"My queen, " you answered, Eumaeus, loyal swineherd, 
"if only the lords would hold their peace a moment! 
Such stories he tells — he'd charm you to your depths. 
Three nights, three days 1 kept him in my shelter; 
/was the first the fellow stumbled onto, 
fleeing from some ship. But not even so 
could he bring his tale of troubles to an end. 
You know how you can stare at a bard in wonder — 
trained by the gods to sing and hold men spellbound — 
how you can long to sit there, listening, all your life 
when the man begins to sing. So he charmed my heart, 
1 tell you, huddling there beside me at my fire. 
He and Odysseus' father go way back, he says, 
sworn friends, and the stranger hails from Crete 
where the stock of old King Minos still lives on, 
and from Crete he made his way, racked by hardship, 
tumbling on like a rolling stone until he turned up here. 
He swears he's heard of Odysseus— just in reach, 
in rich Thesprotian country — still alive, 
laden with treasure, heading home at last!" 
"Go," 
the cautious queen responded, "call him here 
so he can tell me his own tale face-to-face. 
Our friends can sit at the gates or down the halls 
and play their games, debauched to their hearts' content. 
Why not? Their own stores, their bread and seasoned wine, 
lie intact at home; food for their serving-men alone. 
But they, they infest our palace day and night, 
they butcher our cattle, our sheep, our fat goats, 
feasting themselves sick, swilling our glowing wine 
as if there's no tomorrow — all of it, squandered. 
No, there is no man like Odysseus in command 
to drive this curse from the house. Dear god, 
if only Odysseus came back home to native soil now, 
he and his son would avenge the outrage of these men — like that!' 
At her last words Telemachus shook with a lusty sneeze 
and the sudden outburst echoed up and down the halls. 
The queen was seized with laughter, calling out 
to Eumaeus winged words: "Quickly, go! 
Bring me this stranger now, face-to-face! 
You hear how my son sealed all 1 said with a sneeze? 
Solet death come down with grim finality on these suitors — 
one and all — not a single man escape his sudden doom! 
And another thing. Mark my words, 1 tell you. 
If I'm convinced that all he says is true, 
I'll dress him in shirt and cloak, in handsome clothes. " 
Off the swineherd went, following her instructions, 
made his way to the stranger's side and winged a word: 
"Old friend — our queen, wise Penelope, summons you, 
the prince's mother! The spirit moves her now, 
heartsick as she is, 
to ask a question or two about her husband- 
And if she's convinced that all you say is true, 
she'll dress you in shirt and cloak. That's what you need, 
that most of all now. Bread you can always beg 
around the country, fill your belly well — 
they'll give you food, whoever has a mind to." 
"Gladly, Eumaeus," the patient man replied, 
"I'll tell her the whole truth, and nothing but, 
Icarius' daughter, your wise queen Penelope. 
1 know all about that man ... 
it's been my lot to suffer what he's suffered- 
But 1 fear the mob's abuse, those rough young bucks, 
their pride and violence hit the iron skies! 
Just now that scoundrel — as 1 went down the halls, 
harming no one — up and dealt me a jolting blow, 
and who would raise a hand to save me? Telemachus? 
Anyone else? No one. So tell Penelope now, 
anxious as she may be, to wait in the halls 
until the sun goes down. Then she can ask me 
all she likes about her husband's journey home. 
But let her give me a seat close by the fire. 
The clothes on my back are tatters. Well you know — 
you are the first 1 begged for care and shelter." 
Back the swineherd went, following his instructions. 
Penelope, just as he crossed her threshold, broke out, 
"Didn't you bring him? What's in the vagrant's mind? 
Fear of someone? Embarrassed by something else, 
here in the house? Is the fellow bashful? 
A bashful man will make a sorry beggar. " 
You answered your queen, Eumaeus, loyal swineherd, 
"He talks to the point — he thinks as the next man would 
who wants to dodge their blows, that brutal crew. 
He tells you to wait here till the sun goes down. 
It's better for you, my queen. Then you can talk 
with the man in private, hear the stranger's news." 
"Nobody's fool, that stranger," wise Penelope said, 
"he sees how things could go. Surely no men on earth 
can match that gang for reckless, deadly schemes." 
So she agreed, and now, mission accomplished, 
back the loyal swineherd went to mix with the suitors. 
Moving next to the prince, he whispered a parting word, 
their heads close together so no one else could hear. 
"Dear boy, 1 must be off, to see to the pigs 
and the whole farm — your living, mine as well. 
You're the one to tend to all things here. 
Look out for your own skin first, 
do take care, you mustn't come to grief. 
Crowds of your own countrymen plot your death — 
let Zeus wipe out the lot before they kill us all!" 
"Right you are, old friend, " the canny prince replied. 
"Now off you go, once you've had your supper. 
But come back bright and early, 
bring some good sound boars for slaughter. Yes, 
I'll tend to all things here, 1 and the deathless gods. " 
And the swineherd sat down again on his polished stool 
and once he'd supped and drunk to his heart's content, 
back he went to his pigs, leaving the royal precincts 
still filled with f casters, all indulging now 
in the joys of dance and song. 
The day was over. Dusk was falling fast. 
The Beggar-King 
of Ithaca 
Now along came this tramp, this public nuisance 
who used to scrounge a living round the streets of Ithaca — 
notorious for his belly, a ravenous, bottomless pit 
for food and drink, but he had no pith, no brawn, 
despite the looming hulk that met your eyes. 
Arnaeus was his name, 
so his worthy mother called him at birth, 
but all the young men called him Irus for short 
because he'd hustle messages at any beck and call. 
Well he came by to rout the king from his own house 
and met Odysseus now with a rough, abusive burst: 
"Get off the porch, you old goat, before 1 haul you 
off by the leg! Can't you see them give me the wink, 
all of them here, to drag you out — and so 1 would. 
but I've got some pangs of conscience. Up with you, man, 
or before you know it, we'll be trading blows!" 
A killing look, 
and the wily old soldier countered, "Out of your mind? 
What damage have 1 done you?Whai have 1 said? 
1 don't grudge you anything, 
not if the next man up and gives you plenty. 
This doorsill is big enough for the both of us — 
you've got no call to grudge me what's not yours. 
You're another vagrant, just like me, I'd say, 
and it lies with the gods to make us rich or poor. So, 
keep your fists to yourself, don't press your luck, don't rile me, 
or old as 1 am, I'll bloody your lip, splatter your chest 
and buy myself some peace and quiet for tomorrow. 
1 doubt you'll ever come lumbering back again 
to the halls of Laertes' royal son Odysseus." 
"Look who's talking!" the beggar rumbled in anger. 
"How this pot-bellied pig runs off at the mouth — 
like an old crone at her oven! 
Well y've got a knock-out blow in store for hjw — 
I'll batter the tramp with both fists, bash every tooth 
from his jaws, I'll litter the ground with teeth 
like a rogue sow's, punished for rooting corn! 
Belt up — so the lords can see us fight it out. 
How can you beat a champion half your age?" 
Tongue-lashing each other, tempers flaring, 
there on the polished sill before the lofty doors. 
And Antinous, that grand prince, hearing them wrangle, 
broke into gloating laughter, calling to the suitors, 
"Friends, nothing like this has come our way before — 
what sport some god has brought the palace now! 
The stranger and Irus, look, 
they'd battle it out together, fists flying. 
Come, let's pit them against each other — fast!" 
All leapt from their seats with whoops of laughter, 
clustering round the pair of ragged beggars there 
as Eupithes' son Antinous planned the contest. 
"Quiet, my fine friends. Here's what 1 propose. 
These goat sausages sizzling here in the fire — 
we packed them with fat and blood to have for supper. 
Now, whoever wins this bout and proves the stronger, 
let that man step up and take his pick of the lot! 
What's more, from this day on he feasts among us — 
no other beggar will we allow inside 
to cadge his meals from us!' 
They all cheered 
but Odysseus, foxy veteran, plotted on ... 
"Friends, how can an old man, worn down with pain, 
stand up to a young buck? It's just this belly of mine, 
this trouble-maker, tempts me to take a licking. 
So first, all of you swear me a binding oath: 
come, not one of you steps in for Irus here, 
strikes me a foul blow to pull him through 
and lays me in the dust." 
And at that 
they all mouthed the oath that he required, 
and once they vowed they'd never interfere. 
Prince Telemachus drove the matter home: 
"Stranger, if your spine and fighting pride 
prompt you to go against this fellow now, 
have no fear of any suitor in the pack — 
whoever fouls you will have to face a crowd. 
Count on me, your host. And two lords back me up, 
Antinous and Eurymachus — both are men of sense." 
They all shouted approval of the prince 
as Odysseus belted up, roping his rags around his loins, 
baring his big rippling thighs — his boxer's broad shoulders, 
his massive chest and burly arms on full display 
as Athena stood beside him, 
fleshing out the limbs of the great commander ... 
Despite their swagger, the suitors were amazed. 
gaping at one another, trading forecasts: 
"Irus will soon be ironed out for good!" 
"He's in for the beating he begged for all along." 
"Look at the ham on that old gaffer — " 
"Just under his rags!" 
Each outcry jolted Irus to the core — too late. 
The servants trussed his clothes up, dragged him on, 
the flesh on his body quaking now with terror. 
Antinous rounded on him, flinging insults: 
"You, you clumsy ox, you're better off dead 
or never born at all, if you cringe at him, 
paralyzed with fear of an old, broken hulk, 
ground down by the pains that hound his steps. 
Mark my word — so help me I'll make it good — 
if that old relic whips you and wins the day, 
I'll toss you into a black ship and sail you off 
to Echetus, the mainland king who wrecks all men alive! 
He'll lop your nose and ears with his ruthless blade, 
he'll rip your privates out by the roots, he will, 
and serve them up to his dogs to bolt down raw!" 
That threat shook his knees with a stronger fit 
but they hauled him into the ring. Both men put up their fists — 
with the seasoned fighter Odysseus deeply torn now ... 
should he knock him senseless, leave him dead where he dropped 
or just stretch him out on the ground with a light jab? 
As he mulled things over, that way seemed the best: 
a glancing blow, the suitors would not detect him. 
The two men squared off — 
and Irus hurled a fist 
at Odysseus' right shoulder as Aecame through 
with a hook below the ear, pounding Irus' neck, 
smashing the bones inside — 
Suddenly red blood 
came spurting out of his mouth, and headlong down 
he pitched in the dust, howUng, teeth locked in a grin, 
feet beating the ground — 
And the princely suitors, 
flinging their hands in the air, died laughing. 
Grabbing him by the leg, Odysseus hauled him 
through the porch, across the yard to the outer gate, 
heaped him against the courtyard wall, sitting slumped, 
stuck his stick in his hand and gave him a parting shot: 
"Now hold your post — play the scarecrow to all the pigs and dogs! 
But no more lording it over strangers, no more playing 
the beggar-king for you, you loathsome fool, 
or you'll bring down something worse around your neck!" 
He threw his beggar's sack across his shoulders — 
torn and tattered, slung from a fraying rope — 
then back he went to the sill and took his seat. 
The suitors ambled back as well, laughing] auntily, 
toasting the beggar warmly now, those proud young blades, 
one man egging the other on: "Stranger, friend, may Zeus 
and the other deathless gods fill up your sack with blessings!" 
"All your heart desires!" 
"You've knocked him out of action, 
that insatiable tramp — " 
"That parasite on the land!" 
"Ship him off to Echetus, fast — the mainland king 
who wrecks all men alive!" 
Welcome words 
and a lucky omen too — Odysseus' heart leapt up. 
Antinous laid before him a generous goat sausage, 
bubbling fat and blood. Amphinomus took two loaves 
from the wicker tray and set them down beside him, 
drank his health in a golden cup and said, 
"Cheers, old friend, old father, 
saddled now as you are with so much trouble — 
here's to your luck, great days from this day on!" 
And the one who knew the world replied at length, 
"Amphinomus, you seem like a man of good sense to me. 
Just like your father — at least I've heard his praises, 
Nisus of Dulichion, a righteous man, and rich. 
You're his son, they say, you seem well-spoken, too. 
So 1 will tell you something. Listen. Listen closely. 
Of all that breathes and crawls across the earth, 
our mother earth breeds nothing feebler than a man. 
So long as the gods grant him power, spring in his knees, 
he thinks he will never suffer affliction down the years. 
But then, when the happy gods bring on the long hard times, 
bear them he must, against his will, and steel his heart. 
Our lives, our mood and mind as we pass across the earth, 
turn as the days turn ... 
as the father of men and gods makes each day dawn. 
1 too seemed destined to be a man of fortune once, 
and a wild wicked swath 1 cut, indulged my lust for violence, 
staking all on my father and my brothers. 
Look at me now. 
And so, 1 say, let no man ever be lawless all his life, 
just take in peace what gifts the gods will send. 
True, 
but here 1 see you suitors plotting your reckless work, 
carving away at the wealth, affronting the loyal wife 
of a man who won't be gone from kin and country long. 
1 say he's right at hand — and may some power save you, 
spirit you home before you meet him face-to-face 
the moment he returns to native ground! 
Once under his own roof, he and your friends, 
believe you me, won't part till blood has flowed." 
With that 
he poured out honeyed wine to the gods and drank deeply, 
then restored the cup to the young prince's hands. 
Amphinomus made his way back through the hall, 
heart sick with anguish, shaking his head, 
fraught with grave forebodings ... 
but not even so could he escape his fate. 
Even then Athena had bound him fast to death 
at the hands of Prince Telemachus and his spear. 
Now back he went to the seat that he'd left empty. 
But now the goddess Athena with her glinting eyes 
inspired Penelope, Icarius' daughter, wary, poised, 
to display herself to her suitors, fan their hearts, 
inflame them more, and make her even more esteemed 
by her husband and her son than she had been before. 
Forcing a laugh, she called her maid: "Eurynome, 
my spirit longs — though it never did till now — 
to appear before my suitors, loathe them as 1 do. 
I'd say a word to my son too, for his own good, 
not to mix so much with that pernicious crowd, 
so glib with their friendly talk 
but plotting wicked plots they'll hatch tomorrow. " 
"Well said, my child, " the old woman answered, 
"all to the point. Go to the boy and warn him now, 
hold nothing back. But first you should bathe yourself, 
give a gloss to your face. Don't go down like that — 
your eyes dimmed, your cheeks streaked with tears. 
It makes things worse, this grieving on and on. 
Your son's now come of age — your fondest prayer 
to the deathless gods, to see him wear a beard." 
"Eurynome," discreet Penelope objected, 
"don't try to coax me, care for me as you do, 
to bathe myself, refresh my face with oils. 
Whatever glow 1 had died long ago ... 
the gods of Olympus snuffed it out that day 
my husband sailed away in the hollow ships. 
But please, have Autonoe and Hippodamia come 
and support me in the hall. I'll never brave 
those men alone. I'd be too embarrassed." 
Now as the old nurse bustled through the house 
to give the women orders, call them to the queen, 
the bright-eyed goddess thought of one more thing. 
She drifted a sound slumber over Icarius' daughter, 
back she sank and slept, her limbs fell limp and still, 
reclining there on her couch, all the while Athena, 
luminous goddess, lavished immortal gifts on her 
to make her suitors lose themselves in wonder ... 
The divine unguent first. She cleansed her cheeks, 
her brow and fine eyes with ambrosia smooth as the oils 
the goddess Love applies, donning her crown of flowers 
whenever she joins the Graces' captivating dances. 
She made her taller, fuller in form to all men's eyes, 
her skin whiter than ivory freshly carved, and now, 
Athena's mission accomplished, off the bright one went 
as bare-armed maids came in from their own quarters, 
chattering all the way, and sleep released the queen. 
She woke, touched her cheek with a hand, and mused, 
"Ah, what a marvelous gentle sleep, enfolding me 
in the midst of all my anguish! Now if only 
blessed Artemis sent me a death as gentle, now, 
this instant — no more wasting away my life, 
my heart broken in longing for my husband ... 
He had every strength, 
rising over his countrymen, head and shoulders." 
Then, leaving her well-lit chamber, she descended, 
not alone: two of her women followed close behind. 
That radiant woman, once she reached her suitors, 
drawing her glistening veil across her cheeks, 
paused now where a column propped the sturdy roof, 
with one of her loyal handmaids stationed either side. 
The suitors' knees went slack, their hearts dissolved in lust — 
all of them lifted prayers to lie beside her, share her bed. 
But turning toward her son, she warned, "Telemachus, 
your sense of balance is not what it used to be. 
When you were a boy you had much better judgment. 
Now that you've grown and reached your young prime, 
and any stranger, seeing how tall and handsome you are. 
would think you the son of some great man of wealth — 
now your sense of fairness seems to fail you. 
Consider the dreadful thing just done in our halls — 
how you let the stranger be 50 abused! Why, 
suppose our guest, sitting here at peace, 
here in our own house, 
were hauled and badly hurt by such cruel treatment? 
K7£/'d be shamed, disgraced in all men's eyes!" 
"Mother ... " Telemachus paused, then answered. 
"1 cannot fault your anger at all this. 
My heart takes note of everything, feels it, too, 
both the good and the bad — the boy you knew is gone. 
But how can 1 plan my world in a sane, thoughtful way? 
These men drive me mad, hedging me round, right and left, 
plotting their lethal plots, and no one takes my side. 
Still, this battle between the stranger and Irus 
hardly went as the suitors might have hoped: 
the stranger beat him down! 
If only — Father Zeus, Athena and lord Apollo — 
these gallants, now, this moment, here in our house, 
were battered senseless, heads lolling, knees unstrung, 
some sprawled in the courtyard, some sprawled outside! 
Slumped like Irus down at the front gates now, 
whipped, and his head rolling like some drunk. 
He can't stand up on his feet and stagger home, 
whatever home he's got — the man's demolished." 
So Penelope and her son exchanged their hopes 
as Eury machus stepped in to praise the queen. 
"Ah, daughter of Icarius, wise Penelope, 
if all the princes in Ionian Argos saw you now! 
What a troop of suitors would banquet in your halls, 
tomorrow at sunrise! You surpass all women 
in build and beauty, refined and steady mind." 
"Oh no, Eurymachus," wise Penelope demurred, 
"whatever form and feature I had, what praise I'd won, 
the deathless gods destroyed that day the Achaeans 
sailed away to Troy, my husband in their ships, 
Odysseus — if could return to tend my life 
the renown 1 had would only grow in glory. 
Now my life is torment ... 
look at the griefs some god has loosed against me! 
I'll never forget the day he left this land of ours; 
he caught my right hand by the wrist and said, gently, 
'Dear woman, 1 doubt that every Achaean under arms 
will make it home from Troy, all safe and sound. 
The Trojans, they say, are fine soldiers too, 
hurling javelins, shooting flights of arrows, 
charioteers who can turn the tide — like that! — 
when the great leveler. War, brings on some deadlock. 
So 1 cannot tell if the gods will sail me home again 
or I'll go down out there, on the fields of Troy, 
but all things here must rest in your control. 
Watch over my father and mother in the palace, 
just as now, or perhaps a little more, 
when 1 am far from home. 
But once you see the beard on the boy's cheek, 
you wed the man you like, and leave your house behind.' 
So my husband advised me then. Now it all comes true ... 
a night will come when a hateful marriage falls my lot — 
this cursed life of mine! Zeus has torn away my joy. 
But there's something else that mortifies me now. 
Your way is a far cry from the time-honored way 
of suitors locked in rivalry, striving to win 
some noble woman, a wealthy man's daughter. 
They bring in their own calves and lambs 
to feast the friends of the bride-to-be, yes, 
and shower her with gleaming gifts as well. 
They don't devour the woman's goods scot-free." 
staunch Odysseus glowed with joy to hear all this — 
his wife's trickery luring gifts from her suitors now, 
enchanting their hearts with suave seductive words 
but all the while with something else in mind. 
"Gifts?" 
Eupithes' son Antinous took her point at once. 
"Daughter of Icarius, sensible Penelope, 
whatever gifts your suitors would like to bring, 
accept them. How ungracious to turn those gifts away! 
We won't go back to our own estates, or anywhere else, 
till you have wed the man you find the best. " 
So he proposed, and all the rest agreed. 
Each suitor sent a page to go and get a gift. 
Antinous' man brought in a grand, resplendent robe, 
stiff with embroidery, clasped with twelve gold brooches, 
long pins that clipped into sheathing loops with ease. 
Eurymachus' man brought in a necklace richly wrought, 
gilded, strung with amber and glowing like the sun. 
Eurydamas' two men came with a pair of earrings, 
mulberry clusters dangling in triple drops 
with a glint to catch the heart. 
From the halls of lord Pisander, Polyctor's son, 
a servant brought a choker, a fine, gleaming treasure. 
And so each suitor in turn laid on a handsome gift. 
Then the noble queen withdrew to her upper room, 
her file of waiting ladies close behind her, 
bearing the gorgeous presents in their arms. 
Now the suitors turned to dance and song, 
to the lovely beat and sway, 
waiting for dusk to come upon them there ... 
and the dark night came upon them, lost in pleasure. 
They rushed to set up three braziers along the walls 
to give them light, piled them high with kindling, 
sere, well-seasoned, just split with an ax, 
and mixed in chips to keep the torches flaring. 
The maids of Odysseus, steady man, took turns 
to keep the fires up, but the king himself, 
dear to the gods and cunning to the core, 
gave them orders brusquely: "Maids of Odysseus, 
your master gone so long — quick now, off you go 
to the room where your queen and mistress waits. 
Sit with her there and try to lift her spirits, 
combing wool in your hands or spinning yarn. 
But 1 will trim the torches for all her suitors, 
even if they would like to revel on till Morning 
mounts her throne. They'll never wear me down. 
1 have a name for lasting out the worst." 
At that 
the women burst into laughter, glancing back and forth. 
Flushed with beauty, Melantho mocked him shamelessly — 
Dolius was her father but Penelope brought her up; 
she treated her like her own child and gave her toys 
to cheer her heart. But despite that, her heart 
felt nothing for all her mistress' anguish now. 
She was Eury machus' lover, always slept with him. 
She was the one who mocked her king and taunted, 
"Cock of the walk, did someone beat your brains out? 
Why not go bed down at the blacksmith's cozy forge? 
Or a public place where tramps collect? Why here — 
blithering on, nonstop, 
bold as brass in the face of all these lords? 
No fear in your heart? Wine's got to your wits? — 
or do you always play the fool and babble nonsense? 
Lost your head, have you, because you drubbed that hobo Irus? 
You wait — a better man than Irus will take you on, 
he'll box both sides of your skull with heavy fists 
and cart you out the palace gushing blood!" 
" K7f/wait, 
you bitch" — ^the hardened veteran flashed a killing look. 
"I'll go straight to the prince with your foul talk. 
The prince will chop you to pieces here and now!" 
His fury sent the women fluttering off, scattering 
down the hall with panic shaking every limb — 
they knew he spoke the truth. 
But he took up his post by the flaring braziers, 
tending the fires closely, looking after them all, 
though the heart inside him stirred with other things, 
ranging ahead, now, to all that must be done ... 
But Athena had no mind to let the brazen suitors 
hold back now from their heart-rending insults — 
she meant to make the anguish cut still deeper 
into the core of Laertes' son Odysseus. 
Poly bus' son Eurymachus launched in first, 
baiting the king to give his friends a laugh: 
"Listen to me, you lords who court our noble queen! 
1 simply have to say what's on my mind. Look, 
surely the gods have fetched this beggar here 
to Odysseus' house. At least our torchlight seems 
to come from the sheen of the man's own head — 
there's not a hair on his bald pate, not a wisp!" 
Then he wheeled on Odysseus, raider of cities: 
"Stranger, how would you like to work for me 
if 1 took you on — I'd give you decent wages — 
picking the stones to lay a tight dry wall 
or planting tall trees on the edge of my estate? 
I'd give you rations to last you year-round, 
clothes for your body, sandals for your feet. 
Oh no, you've learned your lazy ways too well, 
you've got no itch to stick to good hard work, 
you'd rather go scrounging round the countryside, 
begging for crusts to stuff your greedy gut!" 
"Ah, Eurymachus," Odysseus, master of many exploits, 
answered firmly, "if only the two of us could qo 
man-to-man in the labors of the field ... 
In the late spring, when the long days come round, 
out in the meadow, 1 swinging a well-curved scythe 
and you swinging yours — we'd test our strength for work, 
fasting right till dusk with lots of hay to mow. 
Or give us a team of oxen to drive, purebreds, 
hulking, ruddy beasts, both lusty with fodder, 
paired for age and puUing-power that never flags — 
with four acres to work, the loam churning under the plow — 
you'd see what a straight unbroken furrow 1 could cut you then. 
Or if Zeus would bring some battle on — out of the blue, 
this very day — and give me a shield and two spears 
and a bronze helmet to fit this soldier's temples, 
then you'd see me fight where front ranks clash — 
no more mocking this belly of mine, not then. 
Enough. You're sick with pride, you brutal fool. 
No doubt you count yourself a great, powerful man 
because you sport with a puny crowd, ill-bred to boot. 
If only Odysseus came back home and stood right here, 
in a flash you'd find those doors — broad as they are — 
too cramped for your race to safety through the porch!" 
That made Eurymachus' fury seethe and burst — 
he gave the beggar a dark look and let fly, "You, 
you odious — I'll make you pay for your ugly rant! 
Bold as brass in the face of all these lords? 
No fear in your heart? Wine's got to your wits? — 
or do you always play the fool and babble nonsense? 
Lost your head, have you, because you drubbed that hobo Irus?" 
As he shouted out he seized a stool, but Odysseus, 
fearing the blow, crouched at Amphinomus' knees 
as Eurymachus hurled and hit the wine-steward, 
clipping his right hand — 
his cup dropped, clattered along the floor 
and flat on his back he went, groaning in the dust. 
The suitors broke into uproar through the shadowed halls, 
glancing at one another, trading angry outcries: 
"Would to god this drifter had dropped dead — " 
"Anywhere else before he landed here!" 
"Then he'd never have loosed such pandemonium." 
"Now we're squabbling over beggars!' 
"No more joy 
in the sumptuous feast ..." 
"Now riot rules the day!" 
But now Prince Telemachus dressed them down: 
"Fools, you're out of your minds! No hiding it, 
food and wine have gone to your heads. Some god 
has got your blood up. Come, now you've eaten well 
go home to bed — when the spirit moves, that is. 
/, for one, I'll drive no guest away." 
So he declared. And they all bit their lips, 
amazed the prince could speak with so much daring. 
At last Amphinomus rose to take the floor, 
the noted son of Nisus, King Aretias' grandson. 
"Fair enough, my friends; when a man speaks well 
we have no grounds for wrangling, no cause for abuse. 
Hands off the stranger! And any other servant 
in King Odysseus' palace. Come, steward, 
pour first drops for the god in every cup; 
let's make libations, then go home to bed. 
The stranger? Leave him here in Odysseus' halls 
and have his host Telemachus, tend him well — 
it's the prince's royal house the man has reached." 
So he said. His proposal pleased them all. 
And gallant Mulius, a herald of Dulichion, 
a friend-in-arms of lord Amphinomus too, 
mixed the men a bowl and, hovering closely, 
poured full rounds for all. They tipped cups 
to the blissful gods and then, libations made, 
they drank the heady wine to their hearts' content 
and went their ways to bed, each suitor to his house. 
Penelope and 
Her Guest 
That left the great Odysseus waiting in his hall 
as Athena helped him plot the slaughter of the suitors. 
He turned at once to Telemachus, brisk with orders: 
"Now we must stow the weapons out of reach, my boy, 
all the arms and armor — and when the suitors miss them 
and ask you questions, put them off with a winning story: 
'1 stowed them away, clear of the smoke. A far cry 
from the arms Odysseus left when he went to Troy, 
fire-damaged equipment, black with reeking fumes. 
And a god reminded me of something darker too. 
When you're in your cups a quarrel might break out, 
you'd wound each other, shame your feasting here 
and cast a pall on your courting. 
Iron has powers to draw a man to ruin.' " 
Telemachus did his father's will at once, 
calling out to his old nurse Eurycleia: "Quick, 
dear one, close the women up in their own quarters, 
till 1 can stow my father's weapons in the storeroom. 
Splendid gear, lying about, neglected, black with soot 
since father sailed away. 1 was only a boy then. 
Now 1 must safeguard them from the smoke." 
"High time, child, " the loving nurse replied. 
"If only you'd bother to tend your whole house 
and safeguard a//your treasures. Tell me, 
who's to fetch and carry the torch for you? 
You won't let out the maids who'd light your way." 
"Our friend here will," Telemachus answered coolly. 
"1 won't put up with a man who shirks his work, 
not if he takes his ration from my stores, 
even if he's miles away from home." 
That silenced the old nurse. 
She barred the doors that led from the long hall — 
and up they sprang, Odysseus and his princely son, 
and began to carry off the helmets, studded shields 
and pointed spears, and Pallas Athena strode before them, 
lifting a golden lamp that cast a dazzling radiance round about. 
"Father," Telemachus suddenly burst out to Odysseus, 
"oh what a marvel fills my eyes! Look, look there — 
all the sides of the hall, the handsome crossbeams, 
pinewood rafters, the tall columns towering — 
all glow in my eyes like flaming fire! 
Surely a god is here — 
one of those who rule the vaulting skies!" 
"Quiet," his father, the old soldier, warned him. 
"Get a grip on yourself. No more questions now. 
It's just the way of the gods who rule Olympus. 
Off you go to bed. I'll stay here behind 
to test the women, test your mother too. 
She in her grief will ask me everything 1 know. " 
Under the flaring torchlight, through the hall 
Telemachus made his way to his own bedroom now, 
where he always went when welcome sleep came on him. 
There he lay tonight as well, till Dawn's first light. 
That left the great king still waiting in his hall 
as Athena helped him plot the slaughter of the suitors ... 
Now down from her chamber came reserved Penelope, 
looking for all the world like Artemis or golden Aphrodite. 
Close to the fire her women drew her favorite chair 
with its whorls of silver and ivory, inlaid rings. 
The craftsman who made it years ago, Icmalius, 
added a footrest under the seat itself, 
mortised into the frame, 
and over it all was draped a heavy fleece. 
Here Penelope took her place, discreet, observant. 
The women, arms bared, pressing in from their quarters, 
cleared away the tables, the heaped remains of the feast 
and the cups from which the raucous lords had drunk. 
Raking embers from the braziers onto the ground, 
they piled them high again with seasoned wood, 
providing light and warmth. 
And yet again 
Melantho lashed out at Odysseus: "You still here? — 
you pest, slinking around the house all night, 
leering up at the women? 
Get out, you tramp — be glad of the food you got — 
or we'll sling a torch at you, rout you out at once!" 
A killing glance, and the old trooper countered, 
"What's possessed you, woman? Why lay into me? Such abuse! 
Just because I'm filthy, because 1 wear such rags, 
roving round the country, living hand-to-mouth. 
But it's fate that drives me on: 
that's the lot of beggars, homeless drifters. 
1 too once lived in a lofty house that men admired; 
rolling in wealth, I'd often give to a vagabond like myself, 
whoever he was, whatever need had brought him to my door. 
And crowds of servants 1 had, and lots of all it takes 
to live the life of ease, to make men call you rich. 
But Zeus ruined it all — god's will, no doubt. 
So beware, woman, or one day you may lose it all, 
all your glitter that puts your work-mates in the shade. 
Or your mistress may just fly in a rage and dress you down 
or Odysseus may return — there's still room for hope! 
Or if he's dead as you think and never coming home, 
well there's his son, Telemachus ... 
like father, like son — thanks to god Apollo. 
No women's wildness here in the house escapes 
the prince's eye. He's come of age at last. " 
So he warned, and alert Penelope heard him, 
wheeled on the maid and tongue-lashed her smartly: 
"Make no mistake, you brazen, shameless bitch, 
none of your ugly work escapes me either — 
you will pay for it with your life, you will! 
How well you knew — you heard from my own lips — 
that 1 meant to probe this stranger in our house 
and ask about my husband ... my heart breaks for him." 
She turned to her housekeeper Eurynome and said, 
"Now bring us a chair and spread it soft with fleece, 
so our guest can sit and tell me his whole story 
and hear me out as well. 
I'd like to ask him questions, point by point." 
Eurynome bustled off to fetch a polished chair 
and set it down and spread it soft with fleece. 
Here Odysseus sat, the man of many trials, 
as cautious Penelope began the conversation: 
"Stranger, let me start our questioning myself ... 
Who are you? where are you from? your city? your parents?" 
"My good woman," Odysseus, master of craft, replied, 
"no man on the face of the earth could find fault with you. 
Your fame, believe me, has reached the vaulting skies. 
Fame like a flawless king's who dreads the gods, 
who governs a kingdom vast, proud and strong — 
who upholds justice, true, and the black earth 
bears wheat and barley, trees bow down with fruit 
and the sheep drop lambs and never fail and the sea 
teems with fish — thanks to his decent, upright rule, 
and under his sovereign sway the people flourish. 
So then, here in your house, ask me anything else 
but don't, please, search out my birth, my land, 
or you'll fill my heart to overflowing even more 
as 1 bring back the past ... 
1 am a man who's had his share of sorrows. 
It's wrong for me, in someone else's house, 
to sit here moaning and groaning, sobbing so — 
it makes things worse, this grieving on and on. 
One of your maids, or you yourself, might scold me, 
think it's just the wine that had doused my wits 
and made me drown in tears." 
"No, no, stranger," wise Penelope demurred, 
"whatever form and feature 1 had, what praise I'd won, 
the deathless gods destroyed that day the Achaeans 
sailed away to Troy, my husband in their ships, 
Odysseus — if could return to tend my life 
the renown 1 had would only grow in glory. 
Now my life is torment ... 
look at the griefs some god has loosed against me! 
All the nobles who rule the islands round about, 
Dulichion, Same, and wooded Zacynthus too, 
and all who lord it in sunny Ithaca itself — 
they court me against my will, they lay waste my house. 
So 1 pay no heed to strangers, suppliants at my door, 
not even heralds out on their public errands here — 
1 yearn for Odysseus, always, my heart pines away. 
They rush the marriage on, and 1 spin out my wiles. 
A god from the blue it was inspired me first 
to set up a great loom in our royal halls 
and 1 began to weave, and the weaving finespun, 
the yarns endless, and 1 would lead them on: Young men, 
my suitors, now that King Odysseus is no more, 
go slowly, keen as you are to marry me, until 
1 can finish off this web ... 
so my weaving won't all fray and come to nothing. 
This is a shroud for old lord Laertes, for that day 
when the deadly fate that lays us out at last will take him down. 
1 dread the shame my countrywomen would heap upon me, 
yes, if a man of such wealth should lie in state 
without a shroud for cover.' 
My very words, 
and despite their pride and passion they believed me. 
So by day I'd weave at my great and growing web — 
by night, by the light of torches set beside me, 
1 would unravel all I'd done. Three whole years 
1 deceived them blind, seduced them with this scheme. 
Then, when the wheeling seasons brought the fourth year on 
and the months waned and the long days came round once more, 
then, thanks to my maids — the shameless, reckless creatures — 
the suitors caught me in the act, denounced me harshly. 
So 1 finished it off. Against my will. They forced me. 
And now 1 cannot escape a marriage, nor can 1 contrive 
a deft way out. My parents urge me to tie the knot 
and my son is galled as they squander his estate — 
he sees it all. He's a grown man by now, equipped 
to tend to his own royal house and tend it well: 
Zeus grants my son that honor ... 
But for all that — now tell me who you are. 
Where do you come from? You've hardly sprung 
from a rock or oak like some old man of legend. " 
The master improviser answered, slowly, 
"My lady ... wife of Laertes' son, Odysseus, 
will your questions about my family never end? 
All right then. Here's my story. Even though 
it plunges me into deeper grief than 1 feel now. 
But that's the way of the world, when one has been 
so far from home, so long away as I, roving over 
many cities of men, enduring many hardships. 
Still, 
my story will tell you all you need to know. 
There is a land called Crete ... 
ringed by the wine-dark sea with rolling whitecaps — 
handsome country, fertile, thronged with people 
well past counting — boasting ninety cities, 
language mixing with language side-by -side. 
First come the Achaeans, then the native Cretans, 
hardy, gallant in action, then Cydonian clansmen, 
Dorians living in three tribes, and proud Pelasgians last. 
Central to all their cities is magnificent Cnossos, 
the site where Minos ruled and each ninth year 
conferred with almighty Zeus himself. Minos, 
father of my father, Deucalion, that bold heart. 
Besides myself Deucalion sired Prince Idomeneus, 
who set sail for Troy in his beaked ships of war, 
escorting Atreus' sons. My own name is Aethon. 
1 am the younger-born; 
my older brother's a better man than 1 am. 
Now, it was there in Cnossos that 1 saw him ... 
Odysseus — and we traded gifts of friendship. 
A heavy gale had landed him on our coast, 
driven him way off course, rounding Malea's cape 
when he was bound for Troy. He anchored in Amnisus, 
hard by the goddess' cave of childbirth and labor, 
that rough harbor — barely riding out the storm. 
He came into town at once, asking for Idomeneus, 
claiming to be my brother's close, respected friend. 
Too late. Ten or eleven days had already passed 
since he set sail for Troy in his beaked ships. 
So 1 took Odysseus back to my own house, 
gave him a hero's welcome, treated him in style — 
stores in our palace made for princely entertainment. 
As for his comrades, all who'd shipped with him. 
I dipped into public stock to give them barley, 
ruddy wine and fine cattle for slaughter, 
beef to their hearts' content. A dozen days 
they stayed with me there, those brave Achaeans, 
penned up by a North Wind so stiff that a man, 
even on dry land, could never keep his feet — 
some angry spirit raised that blast, I'd say. 
Then on the thirteenth day the wind died down 
and they set sail for Troy." 
Falsehoods all, 
but he gave his falsehoods all the ring of truth. 
As she listened on, her tears flowed and soaked her cheeks 
as the heavy snow melts down from the high mountain ridges, 
snow the West Wind piles there and the warm East Wind thaws 
and the snow, melting, swells the rivers to overflow their banks — 
so she dissolved in tears, streaming down her lovely cheeks, 
weeping for him, her husband, sitting there beside her. 
Odysseus' heart went out to his grief-stricken wife 
but under his lids his eyes remained stock-still — 
they might have been horn or iron — 
his guile fought back his tears. And she, 
once she'd had her fill of grief and weeping, 
turned again to her guest with this reply: 
"Now, stranger, 1 think I'll test you, just to see 
if there in your house, with all his friends-in-arms, 
you actually entertained my husband as you say. 
Come, tell me what sort of clothing he wore, 
what cut of man was he? 
What of the men who followed in his train?" 
"Ah good woman," 
Odysseus, the great master of subtlety, returned, 
"how hard it is to speak, after so much time 
apart ... why, some twenty years have passed 
since he left my house and put my land behind him. 
Even so, imagine the man as 1 portray him — 
1 can see him now. 
King Odysseus ... 
he was wearing a heavy woolen cape, sea-purple. 
in double folds, with a golden brooch to clasp it, 
twin sheaths for the pins, on the face a work of art: 
a hound clenching a dappled fawn in its front paws, 
slashing it as it writhed. All marveled to see it, 
solid gold as it was, the hound slashing, throttling 
the fawn in its death-throes, hoofs flaiUng to break free. 
1 noticed his glossy tunic too, clinging to his skin 
like the thin glistening skin of a dried onion, 
silky, soft, the glint of the sun itself. 
Women galore would gaze on it with relish. 
And this too. Bear it in mind, won't you? 
I've no idea if Odysseus wore these things at home 
or a comrade gave him them as he boarded ship, 
or a host perhaps — the man was loved by many. 
There were few Achaeans to equal him ... and 1? 
1 gave him a bronze sword myself, a lined cloak, 
elegant, deep red, and a fringed shirt as well, 
and 1 saw him off in his long benched ship of war 
in lordly style. 
Something else. He kept a herald 
beside him, a man a little older than himself. 
I'll try to describe him to you, best 1 can. 
Round-shouldered he was, swarthy, curly-haired. 
His name? Eurybates. And Odysseus prized him 
most of all his men. Their minds worked as one." 
His words renewed her deep desire to weep, 
recognizing the strong clear signs Odysseus offered. 
But as soon as she'd had her fill of tears and grief, 
Penelope turned again to her guest and said, 
"Now, stranger, much as 1 pitied you before, 
now in my house you'll be my special friend, 
my honored guest. 1 am the one, myself, 
who gave him the very clothes that you describe. 
1 brought them up from the storeroom, folded them nea 
fastened the golden brooch to adorn my husband, 
Odysseus — never again will 1 embrace him, 
striding home to his own native land. 
A black day it was 
when he took ship to see that cursed city ... 
Destroy, I call it — 1 hate to say its name!" 
"Ah my queen," the man of craft assured her, 
"noble wife of Laertes' son, Odysseus, 
ravage no more your lovely face with tears 
or consume your heart with grieving for your husband. 
Not that I'd blame you, ever. Any woman will mourn 
the bridegroom she has lost, lain with in love 
and borne his children too. Even though he 
was no Odysseus — a man like a god, they say. 
But dry your tears and take my words to heart. 
1 will tell you the whole truth and hide nothing: 
1 have heard Odysseus now, at last, is on his way, 
he's just in reach, in rich Thesprotian country — 
the man is still alive 
and he's bringing home a royal hoard of treasure, 
gifts he won from the people of those parts. 
His crew? He's lost his crew and hollow ship 
on the wine-dark waters off Thrinacia Island. 
Zeus and Helios raged, dead set against Odysseus 
for his men-at-arms had killed the cattle of the Sun, 
so down to the last hand they drowned in crashing seas. 
But not Odysseus, clinging tight to his ship's keel — 
the breakers flung him out onto dry land, on Scheria, 
the land of Phaeacians, close kin to the gods themselves, 
and with all their hearts they prized him like a god, 
showered the man with gifts, and they'd have gladly 
sailed him home unscathed. In fact Odysseus 
would have been here beside you long ago, 
but he thought it the better, shrewder course 
to recoup his fortunes roving through the world. 
At sly profit-turning there's not a man alive 
to touch Odysseus. He's got no rival there. 
So 1 learned from Phidon, king of Thesprotia, 
who swore to me as he poured libations in his house, 
'The ship's hauled down and the shipmates set to sail. 
to take Odysseus home to native land.' 
Butl... 
he shipped me off before. A Thesprotian cutter 
chanced to be heading for Dulichion rich in wheat. 
But he showed me all the treasure Odysseus had amassed, 
enough to last a man and ten generations of his heirs — 
so great the wealth stored up for him in the king's vaults! 
But Odysseus, he made clear, was off at Dodona then 
to hear the will of Zeus that rustles forth 
from the god's tall leafy oak: how should he return, 
after all the years away, to his own beloved Ithaca, 
openly or in secret? 
And so the man is safe, 
as you can see, and he's coming home, soon, 
he's close, close at hand — 
he won't be severed long from kin and country, 
no, not now. 1 give you my solemn, binding oath. 
1 swear by Zeus, the first, the greatest god — 
by Odysseus' hearth, where 1 have come for help: 
all will come to pass, 1 swear, exactly as 1 say. 
True, this very month— just as the old moon dies 
and the new moon rises into life — Odysseus will return!" 
"If only, my friend," reserved Penelope exclaimed, 
"everything you say would come to pass! 
You'd soon know my affection, know my gifts. 
Any man you meet would call you blest. 
But my heart can sense the way it all will go. 
Odysseus, 1 tell you, is never coming back, 
nor will you ever gain your passage home, 
for we have no masters in our house like him 
at welcoming in or sending off an honored guest. 
Odysseus. There was a man, or was he all a dream? 
But come, women, wash the stranger and make his bed, 
with bedding, blankets and lustrous spreads to keep him warm 
till Dawn comes up and takes her golden throne. 
Then, tomorrow at daybreak, bathe him well 
and rub him down with oil, so he can sit beside 
Telemachus in the hall, enjoy his breakfast there. 
And anyone who offends our guest beyond endurance — 
he defeats himself; he's doomed to failure here, 
no matter how raucously he raves and blusters on. 
For how can you know, my friend, if 1 surpass 
all women in thoughtf ulness and shrewd good sense, 
if I'd allow you to take your meals at hall 
so weatherbeaten, clad in rags and tatters? 
Our lives are much too brief ... 
If a man is cruel by nature, cruel in action, 
the mortal world will call down curses on his head 
while he is alive, and all will mock his memory after death. 
But then if a man is kind by nature, kind in action, 
his guests will carry his fame across the earth 
and people all will praise him from the heart." 
"Wait, my queen," the crafty man objected, 
"noble wife of Laertes' son, Odysseus — 
blankets and glossy spreads? They 're not my style. 
Not from the day 1 launched out in my long-oared ship 
and the snowy peaks of Crete went fading far astern. 
I'll lie as I've done through sleepless nights before. 
Many a night I've spent on rugged beds afield, 
waiting for Dawn to mount her lovely throne. 
Nor do 1 pine for any footbaths either. 
Of all the women who serve your household here, 
not one will touch my feet. Unless, perhaps, 
there is some old retainer, the soul of trust, 
someone who's borne as much as 1 have borne ... 
1 wouldn't mind if 5Ae would touch my feet." 
"Dear friend, 
the discreet Penelope replied, "never has any man 
so thoughtful — of all the guests in my palace 
come from foreign parts — been as welcome as you ... 
so sensible, so apt, is every word you say. 
1 have just such an old woman, seasoned, wise, 
who carefully tended my unlucky husband, reared him, 
took him into her arms the day his mother bore him — 
frail as the woman is, she'll wash your feet. 
Up with you now, my good old Eurycleia, 
come and wash your master's ... equal in years. 
Odysseus must have feet and hands like his by now — 
hardship can age a person overnight." 
At that name 
the old retainer buried her face in both hands, 
burst into warm tears and wailed out in grief, 
"Oh my child, how helpless 1 am to help you now! 
How Zeus despised you, more than all other men, 
god-fearing man that you were ... 
Never did any mortal burn the Old Thunderer 
such rich thighbones — offerings charred and choice — 
never as many as you did, praying always to reach 
a ripe old age and raise a son to glory. Now, 
you alone he's robbed of your home-coming day! 
Just so, the women must have mocked my king, 
far away, when he'd stopped at some fine house — 
just as all these bitches, stranger, mock you here. 
And because you shrink from their taunts, their wicked barbs, 
you will not let them wash you. The work is mine — 
Icarius' daughter, wise Penelope, bids me now 
and 1 am all too glad, /will wash your feet, 
both for my own dear queen and for yourself — 
your sorrows wring my heart ... and why? 
Listen to me closely, mark my words. 
Many a wayworn guest has landed here 
but never, 1 swear, has one so struck my eyes — 
your build, your voice, your feet — you're like Odysseus ... 
to the life!" 
"Old woman," wily Odysseus countered, 
"that's what they all say who've seen us both. 
We bear a striking resemblance to each other, 
as you have had the wit to say yourself. " 
The old woman took up a burnished basin 
she used for washing feet and poured in bowls 
of fresh cold water before she stirred in hot. 
Odysseus, sitting full in the firelight, suddenly 
swerved round to the dark, gripped by a quick misgiving — 
soon as she touched him she might spot the scar! 
The truth would all come out. 
Bending closer 
she started to bathe her master ... then, 
in a flash, she knew the scar — 
that old wound 
made years ago by a boar's white tusk when Odysseus 
went to Parnassus, out to see Autolycus and his sons. 
The man was his mother's noble father, one who excelled 
the world at thievery, that and subtle, shifty oaths. 
Hermes gave him the gift, overjoyed by the thighs 
of lambs and kids he burned in the god's honor — 
Hermes the ready partner in his crimes. Now, 
Autolycus once visited Ithaca's fertile land, 
to find his daughter 's son had just been born. 
Eurycleia set him down on the old man's knees 
as he finished dinner, urging him, "Autolycus, 
you must find a name for your daughter's darling son. 
The baby comes as the answer to her prayers." 
"You, 
my daughter, and you, my son-in-law," Autolycus returned, 
"give the boy the name 1 tell you now. Just as 1 
have come from afar, creating pain for many — 
men and women across the good green earth — 
so let his name be Odysseus... 
the Son of Pain, a name he'll earn in full. 
And when he has come of age and pays his visit 
to Parnassus — ^the great estate of his mother's line 
where all my treasures lie — 1 will give him enough 
to cheer his heart, then speed him home to you." 
And so, 
in time, Odysseus went to collect the splendid gifts. 
Autolycus and the sons of Autolycus warmed him in 
with eager handclasps, hearty words of welcome. 
His mother's mother, Amphithea, hugged the boy 
and kissed his face and kissed his shining eyes. 
Autolycus told his well-bred sons to prepare 
a princely feast. They followed orders gladly, 
herded an ox inside at once, five years old, 
skinned it and split the carcass into quarters, 
deftly cut it in pieces, skewered these on spits, 
roasted all to a turn and served the portions out. 
So all day long till the sun went down they feasted, 
consuming equal shares to their hearts' content. 
Then when the sun had set and night came on 
they turned to bed and took the gift of sleep. 
As soon 
as young Dawn with her rose-red fingers shone once more 
they all moved out for the hunt, hounds in the lead, 
Autolycus' sons and Prince Odysseus in their ranks. 
Climbing Parnassus' ridges, thick with timber", 
they quickly reached the mountain's windy folds 
and just as the sun began to strike the plowlands, 
rising out of the deep calm flow of the Ocean River, 
the beaters came to a wooded glen, the hounds broke, 
hot on a trail, and right behind the pack they came, 
Autolycus' sons — Odysseus out in front now, 
pressing the dogs, brandishing high his spear 
with its long shadow waving. Then and there 
a great boar lay in wait, in a thicket lair so dense 
that the sodden gusty winds could never pierce it, 
nor could the sun's sharp rays invade its depths 
nor a downpour drench it through and through, 
so dense, so dark, and piled with fallen leaves. 
Here, as the hunters closed in for the kill, 
crowding the hounds, the tramp of men and dogs 
came drumming round the boar — he crashed from his lair, 
his razor back bristling, his eyes flashing fire 
and charging up to the hunt he stopped, at bay — 
and Odysseus rushed him first, 
shaking his long spear in a sturdy hand, 
wild to strike but the boar struck faster, 
lunging in on the slant, a tusk thrusting up 
over the boy 's knee, gouging a deep strip of flesh 
but it never hit the bone — 
Odysseus thrust and struck, 
stabbing the beast's right shoulder — 
a glint of bronze — 
the point ripped clean through, and down in the dust he dropped, 
grunting out his breath as his life winged away. 
The sons of Autolycus, working over Odysseus, 
skillfully binding up his open wound — 
the gallant, godlike prince — 
chanted an old spell that stanched the blood 
and quickly bore him home to their father's palace. 
There, in no time, Autolycus and the sons of Autolycus 
healed him well and, showering him with splendid gifts, 
sped Odysseus back to his native land, to Ithaca, 
a young man filled with joy . His happy parents, 
his father and noble mother, welcomed him home 
and asked him of all his exploits, blow-by-blow: 
how did he get that wound? He told his tale with style, 
how the white tusk of a wild boar had gashed his leg, 
hunting on Parnassus with Autolycus and his sons ... 
That scar — 
as the old nurse cradled his leg and her hands passed down 
she felt it, knew it, suddenly let his foot fall — 
down it dropped in the basin — ^the bronze clanged, 
tipping over, spilling water across the floor. 
Joy and torment gripped her heart at once, 
tears rushed to her eyes — ^voice choked in her throat 
she reached for Odysseus' chin and whispered quickly, 
"Yes, yes! you are Odysseus— oh dear boy — 
1 couldn't know you before ... 
not till 1 touched the body of my king!" 
She glanced at Penelope, keen to signal her 
that here was her own dear husband, here and now, 
but she could not catch the glance, she took no heed, 
Athena turned her attention elsewhere. But Odysseus — 
his right hand shot out, clutching the nurse's throat, 
with his left he hugged her to himself and muttered. 
"Nurse, you want to kill me? You suckled me yourself 
at your own breast — and now I'm home, at last, 
after bearing twenty years of brutal hardship, 
home, on native ground. But now you know, 
now that a god has flashed it in your mind, 
quiet! not a word to anyone in the house. 
Or else, 1 warn you — and 1 mean business too — 
if a god beats down these brazen suitors at my hands, 
1 will not spare you — my old nurse that you are — 
when 1 kill the other women in my house." 
"Child, " shrewd old Eurycleia protested, 
"what nonsense you let slip through your teeth! 
You know me — I'm stubborn, never give an inch — 
I'll keep still as solid rock or iron. 
One more thing. Take it to heart, 1 tell you. 
If a god beats down these brazen suitors at your hands, 
I'll report in full on the women in your house: 
who are disloyal to you, who are guiltless." 
"Nurse," the cool tactician Odysseus said, 
"why bother to count them off? A waste of breath. 
I'll observe them, judge each one myself. 
Just be quiet. Keep your tales to yourself. 
Leave the rest to the gods." 
Hushed so, 
the old nurse went padding along the halls 
to fetch more water — her basin had all spilled — 
and once she'd bathed and rubbed him down with oil, 
Odysseus drew his chair up near the fire again, 
trying to keep warm, 
but he hid his scar beneath his beggar's rags 
as cautious Penelope resumed their conversation: 
"My friend, 1 have only one more question for you, 
something slight, now the hour draws on for welcome sleep — 
for those who can yield to sweet repose, that is, 
heartsick as they are. As for myself, though, 
some god has sent me pain that knows no bounds. 
All day long 1 indulge myself in sighs and tears 
as 1 see to my tasks, direct the household women. 
When night foils and the world lies lost in sleep, 
1 take to my bed, my heart throbbing, about to break, 
anxieties swarming, piercing — 1 may go mad with grief. 
Like Pandareus' daughter, the nightingale in the green woods 
lifting her lovely song at the first warm rush of spring, 
perched in the treetops' rustling leaves and pouring forth 
her music shifting, trilling and sinking, rippling high to burst 
in grief for Itylus, her beloved boy. King Zethus' son 
whom she in innocence once cut down with bronze ... 
so my wavering heart goes shuttUng, back and forth: 
Do 1 stay beside my son and keep all things secure — 
my lands, my serving- women, the grand high-roofed house — 
true to my husband's bed, the people's voice as well? 
Or do 1 follow, at last, the best man who courts me 
here in the halls, who gives the greatest gifts? 
My son — ^when he was a boy and lighthearted — 
urged me not to marry and leave my husband's house. 
But now he has grown and reached his young prime, 
he begs me to leave our palace, travel home. 
Telemachus, so obsessed with his own estate, 
the wealth my princely suitors bleed away. 
But please, 
read this dream for me, won't you? Listen closely ... 
1 keep twenty geese in the house, from the water trough 
they come and peck their wheat — 1 love to watch them all. 
But down from a mountain swooped this great hook-beaked eagle, 
yes, and he snapped their necks and killed them one and all 
and they lay in heaps throughout the halls while he, 
back to the clear blue sky he soared at once. 
But /wept and wailed — only a dream, of course — 
and our well-groomed ladies came and clustered round me, 
sobbing, stricken: the eagle killed my geese. But down 
he swooped again and settling onto a jutting rafter 
called out in a human voice that dried my tears, 
'Courage, daughter of famous King Icarius! 
This is no dream but a happy waking vision. 
real as day, that will come true for you. 
The geese were your suitors — 1 was once the eagle 
but now 1 am your husband, back again at last, 
about to launch a terrible fate against them all!' 
So he vowed, and the soothing sleep released me. 
1 peered around and saw my geese in the house, 
pecking at their wheat, at the same trough 
where they always took their meal." 
"Dear woman," 
quick Odysseus answered, "twist it however you like, 
your dream can only mean one thing. Odysseus 
told you himself — he'll make it come to pass. 
Destruction is clear for each and every suitor; 
not a soul escapes his death and doom." 
"Ah my friend," seasoned Penelope dissented, 
"dreams are hard to unravel, wayward, drifting things — 
not all we glimpse in them will come to pass ... 
Two gates there are for our evanescent dreams, 
one is made of ivory, the other made of horn. 
Those that pass through the ivory cleanly carved 
are will-o'-the-wisps, their message bears no fruit. 
The dreams that pass through the gates of polished horn 
are fraught with truth, for the dreamer who can see them. 
But 1 can't believe my strange dream has come that way, 
much as my son and 1 would love to have it so. 
One more thing I'll tell you — ^weigh it well. 
The day that dawns today, this cursed day, 
will cut me off from Odysseus' house. Now, 
1 mean to announce a contest with those axes, 
the ones he would often line up here inside the hall, 
twelve in a straight unbroken row like blocks to shore a keel, 
then stand well back and whip an arrow through the lot. 
Now 1 will bring them on as a trial for my suitors. 
The hand that can string the bow with greatest ease, 
that shoots an arrow clean through all twelve axes — 
he's the man 1 follow, yes, forsaking this house 
where 1 was once a bride, this gracious house 
so filled with the best that life can offer — 
I shall always remember it, that I know ... 
even in my dreams." 
"Oh my queen," 
Odysseus, man of exploits, urged her on, 
"royal wife of Laertes' son, Odysseus, now, 
don't put off this test in the halls a moment. 
Before that crew can handle the polished bow, 
string it taut and shoot through all those axes — 
Odysseus, man of exploits, will be home with you!" 
"If only, my friend," the wise Penelope replied, 
"you were willing to sit beside me in the house, 
indulging me in the comfort of your presence, 
sleep would never drift across my eyes. 
But one can't go without his sleep forever. 
The immortals give each thing its proper place 
in our mortal lives throughout the good green earth. 
So now I'm going back to my room upstairs 
and lie down on my bed, 
that bed of pain my tears have streaked, year in, 
year out, from the day Odysseus sailed away to see ... 
Destroy, 1 call it — 1 hate to say its name! 
There I'll rest, while you lie here in the hall, 
spreading your blankets somewhere on the floor, 
or the women will prepare a decent bed." 
With that 
the queen went up to her lofty well-lit room 
and not alone: her women followed close behind. 
Penelope, once they reached the upper story, 
fell to weeping for Odysseus, her beloved husband, 
till watchful Athena sealed her eyes with welcome sleep. 
Portents Gather 
Off in the entrance-hall the great king made his bed, 
spreading out on the ground the raw hide of an ox, 
heaping over it fleece from sheep the suitors 
butchered day and night, then Eurynome threw 
a blanket over him, once he'd nestled down. 
And there Odysseus lay ... 
plotting within himself the suitors' death — 
awake, alert, as the women slipped from the house, 
the maids who whored in the suitors' beds each night, 
tittering, linking arms and frisking as before. 
The master's anger rose inside his chest, 
torn in thought, debating, head and heart — 
should he up and rush them, kill them one and all 
or let them rut with their lovers one last time? 
The heart inside him growled low with rage, 
as a bitch mounting over her weak, defenseless puppies 
growls, facing a stranger, bristling for a showdown — 
so he growled from his depths, hackles rising at their outrage. 
But he struck his chest and curbed his fighting heart: 
"Bear up, old heart! You've borne worse, far worse, 
that day when the Cyclops, man-mountain, bolted 
your hardy comrades down. But you held fast — 
Nobody but your cunning pulled you through 
the monster's cave you thought would be your death. " 
So he forced his spirit into submission, 
the rage in his breast reined back — unswerving, 
all endurance. But he himself kept tossing, turning, 
intent as a cook before some white-hot blazing fire 
who rolls his sizzling sausage back and forth, 
packed with fat and blood — keen to broil it quickly, 
tossing, turning it, this way, that way — so he cast about: 
how could he get these shameless suitors in his clutches, 
one man facing a mob? ... when close to his side she came, 
Athena sweeping down from the sky in a woman's build 
and hovering at his head, the goddess spoke: 
"Why still awake? The unluckiest man alive! 
Here is your house, your wife at home, your son, 
as fine a boy as one could hope to have. " 
"True," 
the wily fighter replied, "how right you are, goddess, 
but still this worry haunts me, heart and soul — 
how can 1 get these shameless suitors in my clutches? 
Single-handed, braving an army always camped inside. 
There's another worry, that haunts me even more. 
What if 1 kill them — ^thanks to you and Zeus — 
how do 1 run from under their avengers? 
Show me the way, 1 ask you." 
"Impossible man!" 
Athena bantered, the goddess' eyes ablaze. 
"Others are quick to trust a weaker comrade, 
some poor mortal, far less cunning than 1. 
But 1 am a goddess, look, the very one who 
guards you in all your trials to the last. 
1 tell you this straight out: 
even if fifty bands of mortal fighters 
closed around us, hot to kill us off in battle, 
still you could drive away their herds and sleek flocks! 
So, surrender to sleep at last. What a misery, 
keeping watch through the night, wide awake — 
you'll soon come up from under all your troubles." 
With that she showered sleep across his eyes 
and back to Olympus went the lustrous goddess. 
As soon as sleep came on him, loosing his limbs, 
slipping the toils of anguish from his mind, 
his devoted wife awoke and, 
sitting up in her soft bed, returned to tears. 
When the queen had wept to her heart's content 
she prayed to the Huntress, Artemis, first of all: 
"Artemis — goddess, noble daughter of Zeus, if only 
you'd whip an arrow through my breast and tear my life out, 
now, at once! Or let some whirlwind pluck me up 
and sweep me away along those murky paths and 
fling me down where the Ocean River running 
round the world rolls back upon itself! 
Quick 
as the whirlwinds swept away Pandareus' daughters — 
years ago, when the gods destroyed their parents, 
leaving the young girls orphans in their house. 
But radiant Aphrodite nursed them well 
on cheese and luscious honey and heady wine, 
and Hera gave them beauty and sound good sense, 
more than all other women — ^virgin Artemis made them tall 
and Athena honed their skills to fashion lovely work. 
But then, when Aphrodite approached Olympus' peaks 
to ask for the girls their crowning day as brides 
from Zeus who loves the lightning — Zeus who knows all, 
all that's fated, all not fated, for mortal man — 
then the storm spirits snatched them away 
and passed them on to the hateful Furies, 
yes, for all theirloving care. 
Just so 
may the gods who rule Olympus blot me out! 
Artemis with your glossy braids, come shoot me dead — 
so 1 can plunge beneath this loathsome earth 
with the image of Odysseus vivid in my mind. 
Never let me warm the heart of a weaker man! 
Even grief is bearable, true, when someone weeps 
through the days, sobbing, heart convulsed with pain, 
yet embraced by sleep all night — sweet oblivion, sleep 
dissolving all, the good and the bad, once it seals our eyes — 
but even my dreams torment me, sent by wicked spirits. 
Again — just this night — someone lay beside me ... 
like Odysseus to the life, when he embarked 
with his men-at-arms. My heart raced with joy . 
No dream, 1 thought, the waking truth at last!" 
At those words 
Dawn rose on her golden throne in a sudden gleam of light. 
And great Odysseus caught the sound of his wife's cry 
and began to daydream — deep in his heart it seemed 
she stood beside him, knew him, now, at last ... 
Gathering up the fleece and blankets where he'd slept, 
he laid them on a chair in the hall, he took the oxhide out 
and spread it down, lifted his hands and prayed to Zeus: 
"Father Zeus, if you really willed it so — ^to bring me 
home over land and sea-lanes, home to native ground 
after all the pain you brought me — show me a sign, 
a good omen voiced by someone awake indoors, 
another sign, outside, from Zeus himself!" 
And Zeus in all his wisdom heard that prayer. 
He thundered at once, out of his clear blue heavens 
high above the clouds, and Odysseus' spirit lifted. 
Then from within the halls a woman grinding grain 
let fly a lucky word. Close at hand she was, 
where the good commander set the handmills once 
and now twelve women in all performed their tasks, 
grinding the wheat and barley, marrow of men's bones. 
The rest were abed by now — they 'd milled their stint — 
this one alone, the frailest of all, kept working on. 
Stopping her mill, she spoke an omen for her master: 
"Zeus, Father! King of gods and men, now there 
was a crack of thunder out of the starry sky — 
and not a cloud in sight! 
Sure it's a sign you're showing someone now. 
So, poor as 1 am, grant mern^ prayer as well: 
let this day be the last, the last these suitors 
bolt their groaning feasts in King Odysseus' house! 
These brutes who break my knees — heart-wrenching labor, 
grinding their grain — now let them eat their last! " 
A lucky omen, linked with Zeus's thunder. 
Odysseus' heart leapt up, the man convinced 
he'd grind the scoundrels' lives out in revenge. 
By now 
the other maids were gathering in Odysseus' royal palace, 
raking up on the hearth the fire still going strong. 
Telemachus climbed from bed and dressed at once, 
brisk as a young god — 
over his shoulder he slung his well-honed sword, 
he fastened rawhide sandals under his smooth feet, 
he seized his tough spear tipped with a bronze point 
and took his stand at the threshold, calling Eury cleia: 
"Dear nurse, how did you treat the stranger in our house? 
With bed and board? Or leave him to lie untended? 
That would be mother's way — sensible as she is — 
all impulse, doting over some worthless stranger, 
turning a good man out to face the worst." 
"Please, child," his calm old nurse replied, 
"don't blame Aer— your mother's blameless this time. 
He sat and drank his wine till he'd had his fill. 
Food? He'd lost his hunger. But she asked him. 
And when it was time to think of turning in, 
she told the maids to spread a decent bed, but he — 
so down-and-out, poor soul, so dogged by fate — 
said no to snuggling into a bed, between covers. 
No sir, the man lay down in the entrance-hall, 
on the raw hide of an ox and sheep's fleece, 
and we threw a blanket over him, so we did. " 
Hearing that, 
Telemachus strode out through the palace, spear in hand, 
and a pair of sleek hounds went trotting at his heels. 
He made for the meeting grounds to join the island lords 
while Eurycleia the daughter of Ops, Pisenor's son, 
that best of women, gave the maids their orders: 
"Quick now, look alive, sweep out the house, 
wet down the floors! 
You, those purple coverlets, 
fling them over the fancy chairs! 
All those tables, 
sponge them down — scour the winebowls, burnished cups! 
The rest — now off you go to the spring and fetch some water, 
fast as your legs can run! 
Our young gallants won't be long from the palace, 
they'll be bright and early — ^today's a public feast." 
They hung on her words and ran to do her bidding. 
Full twenty scurried off to the spring's dark water, 
others bent to the housework, all good hands. 
Then in they trooped, the strutting serving-men, 
who split the firewood cleanly now as the women 
bustled in from the spring, the swineherd at their heels, 
driving three fat porkers, the best of all his herds. 
And leaving them to root in the broad courtyard, 
up he went to Odysseus, hailed him warmly: 
"Friend, do the suitors show you more respect 
or treat you like the dregs of the earth as always?" 
"Good Eumaeus, " the crafty man replied, 
"if only the gods would pay back their outrage! 
Wild and reckless young cubs, conniving here 
in another's house. They've got no sense of shame." 
And now as the two confided in each other, 
the goatherd Melanthius sauntered toward them, 
herding his goats with a pair of drovers' help, 
the pick of his flocks to make the suitors' meal. 
Under the echoing porch he tethered these, then turned 
on Odysseus once again with cutting insults: "Still alive? 
Still hounding your betters, begging round the house? 
Why don't you cart yourself away? Get out! 
We'll never part, 1 swear, 
till we taste each other's fists. Riffraff, 
you and your begging make us sick! Get out — 
we're hardly the only banquet on the island." 
No reply. The wily one just shook his head, 
silent, his mind churning with thoughts of bloody work ... 
Third to arrive was Philoetius, that good cowherd, 
prodding in for the crowd a heifer and fat goats. 
Boatmen had brought them over from the mainland, 
crews who ferry across all travelers too, 
whoever comes for passage. 
Under the echoing porch he tethered all heads well 
and then approached the swineherd, full of questions: 
"Who's this stranger, Eumaeus, just come to the house? 
What roots does the man claim — who are his people? 
Where are his blood kin? his father's fields? 
Poor beggar. But what a build — a royal king's! 
Ah, once the gods weave trouble into our lives 
they drive us across the earth, they drown us all in pain, 
even kings of the realm." 
And with that thought 
he walked up to Odysseus, gave him his right hand 
and winged a greeting: "Cheers, old friend, old father, 
here's to your luck, great days from this day on — 
saddled now as you are with so much trouble! 
Father Zeus, no god's more deadly than you. 
No mercy for men, you give them life yourself 
then plunge them into misery, brutal hardship. 
1 broke into sweat, my friend, when 1 first saw you — 
see, my eyes still brim with tears, remembering him, 
Odysseus ... He must wear such rags, 1 know it, 
knocking about, drifting through the world 
if he's still alive and sees the light of day. 
If he's dead already, lost in the House of Death, 
my heart aches for Odysseus, my great lord and master. 
He set me in charge of his herds, in Cephallenian country, 
when 1 was just a youngster. How they've grown by now, 
past counting! No mortal on earth could breed 
a finer stock of oxen — broad in the brow, 
they thrive like ears of corn. But just look, 
these interlopers tell me to drive them in 
for their own private feasts. Not a thought 
for the young prince in the house, they never flinch — 
no regard for the gods' wrath — in their mad rush 
to carve up his goods, my master gone so long! 
I'm tossed from horn to horn in my own mind ... 
What a traitor I'd be, with the prince alive, 
if I'd run off to some other country, herds and all, 
to a new set of strangers. Ah, but isn't it worse 
to hold out here, tending the herds for upstarts, 
not their owners — suffering all the pains of hell? 
1 could have fled, ages ago, to some great king 
who'd give me shelter. It's unbearable here. 
True, but 1 still dream of my old master, 
unlucky man — if only hd& drop in from the blue 
and drive these suitors all in a rout throughout the halls!" 
"Cowherd," the cool tactician Odysseus answered, 
"you're no coward, and nobody's fool, I'd say. 
Even 1 can see there's sense in that old head. 
So 1 tell you this on my solemn, binding oath: 
1 swear by Zeus, the first of all the gods — 
by the table of hospitality waiting for us, 
by Odysseus' hearth where 1 have come for help, 
Odysseus will come home while you're still here. 
You'll see with your own eyes, if you have the heart, 
these suitors who lord it here cut down in blood. " 
"Stranger, if only," the cowherd cried aloud, 
"if only Zeus would make that oath come true — 
you'd see my power, my fighting arms in action!" 
Eumaeus echoed his prayer to all the gods 
that their wise king would soon come home again. 
Now as they spoke and urged each other on, 
and once more the suitors were plotting certain doom 
for the young prince — suddenly, banking high on the left 
an omen flew past, an eagle clutching a trembling dove. 
And Amphinomus rose in haste to warn them all, 
"My friends, we'll never carry off this plot 
to kill the prince. Let's concentrate on feasting." 
His timely invitation pleased them all. 
The suitors ambled into Odysseus' royal house 
and flinging down their cloaks on a chair or bench, 
they butchered hulking sheep and fatted goats, 
full-grown hogs and a young cow from the herd. 
They roasted all the innards, served them round 
and filled the bowls with wine and mixed it well. 
Eumaeus passed out cups; Philoetius, trusty herdsman, 
brought on loaves of bread in ample wicker trays; 
Melanthius poured the wine. The whole company 
reached out for the good things that lay at hand. 
Telemachus, maneuvering shrewdly, sat his father down 
on the stone threshold, just inside the timbered hall, 
and set a rickety stool and cramped table there. 
He gave him a share of innards, poured his wine 
in a golden cup and added a bracing invitation: 
"Now sit right there. Drink your wine with the crowd. 
I'll defend you from all their taunts and blows, 
these young bucks. This is no public place, 
this is Odysseus 'house — 
my father won it for me, so it's mine. 
You suitors, control yourselves. No insults now, 
no brawling, no, or it's war between us all." 
So he declared. And they all bit their lips, 
amazed the prince could speak with so much daring. 
Only Eupithes' son Antinous ventured, 
"Fighting words, but do let's knuckle under — 
to our prince. Such abuse, such naked threats! 
But clearly Zeus has foiled us. Or long before 
we would have shut his mouth for him in the halls, 
fluent and flowing as he is. " 
So he mocked. 
Telemachus paid no heed. 
And now through the streets 
the heralds passed, leading the beasts marked out 
for sacrifice on Apollo's grand festal day, 
and the islanders with their long hair were filing 
into the god's shady grove — ^the distant deadly Archer. 
Those in the palace, once they'd roasted the prime cuts, 
pulled them off the spits and, sharing out the portions, 
fell to the royal feast ... 
The men who served them gave Odysseus his share, 
fair as the helping they received themselves. 
So Telemachus ordered, the king's own son. 
But Athena had no mind to let the brazen suitors 
hold back now from their heart-rending insults — 
she meant to make the anguish cut still deeper 
into the core of Laertes' son Odysseus. 
There was one among them, a lawless boor — 
Ctesippus was his name, he made his home in Same, 
a fellow so impressed with his own astounding wealth 
he courted the wife of Odysseus, gone for years. 
Now the man harangued his swaggering comrades: 
"Listen to me, my fine friends, here's what /say! 
From the start our guest has had his fair share — 
it's only right, you know. 
How impolite it would be, how wrong to scant 
whatever guest Telemachus welcomes to his house. 
Look here, I'll give him a proper guest-gift too, 
a prize he can hand the crone who bathes his feet 
or a tip for another slave who haunts the halls 
of our great king Odysseus! " 
On that note, 
grabbing an oxhoof out of a basket where it lay, 
with a brawny hand he flung it straight at the king — 
but Odysseus ducked his head a little, dodging the blow, 
and seething just as the oxhoof hit the solid wall 
he clenched his teeth in a wry sardonic grin. 
Telemachus dressed Ctesippus down at once: 
"Ctesippus, you can thank your lucky stars 
you missed our guest — he ducked your blow, by god! 
Else 1 would have planted my sharp spear in your bowels — 
your father would have been busy with your funeral, 
not your wedding here. Enough. 
Don't let me see more offenses in my house, 
not from anyone! I'm alive to it all, now, 
the good and the bad — ^the boy you knew is gone. 
But 1 still must bear with this, this JoveJy sight ... 
sheepflocks butchered, wine swilled, food squandered — 
how can a man fight off so many single-handed? 
But no more of your crimes against me, please! 
Unless you're bent on cutting me down, now, 
and I'd rather die, yes, better that by far 
than have to look on at your outrage day by day: 
guests treated to blows, men dragging the serving-women 
through our noble house, exploiting them all, no shame!" 
Dead quiet. The suitors all fell silent, hushed. 
At last Damastor's son Agelaus rose and said, 
"Fair enough, my friends; when a man speaks well 
we have no grounds for wrangling, no cause for abuse. 
Hands off this stranger! Or any other servant 
in King Odysseus' palace. But now a word 
of friendly advice for Telemachus and his mother — 
here's hoping it proves congenial to them both. 
So long as your hearts still kept a spark alive 
that Odysseus would return — that great, deep man — 
who could blame you, playing the waiting game at home 
and holding off the suitors? The better course, it's true. 
What if Odysseus Jiadreturned, had made it home at last? 
But now it's clear as day — the man will come no more. 
So go, Telemachus, sit with your mother, coax her 
to wed the best man here, the one who offers most, 
so you can have and hold your father's estate, 
eating and drinking here, your mind at peace 
while mother plays the wife in another's house." 
The young prince, keeping his poise, replied, 
"1 swear by Zeus, Agelaus, by all my father suffered — 
dead, no doubt, or wandering far from Ithaca these days — 
1 don't delay my mother's marriage, not a moment, 
1 press her to wed the man who takes her heart. 
I'll shower her myself with boundless gifts. 
But 1 shrink from driving mother from our house, 
issuing harsh commands against her will. 
God forbid it ever comes to tJiatf 
So he vowed 
and Athena set off uncontrollable laughter in the suitors, 
crazed them out of their minds — mad, hysterical laughter 
seemed to break from the jaws of strangers, not their own, 
and the meat they were eating oozed red with blood — 
tears flooded their eyes, hearts possessed by grief. 
The inspired seer Theoclg menus wailed out in their midst, 
"Poor men, what terror is tAJsthat overwhelms you so? 
Night shrouds your heads, your faces, down to your knees — 
cries of mourning are bursting into fire — cheeks rivering tears — 
the walls and the handsome crossbeams dripping dank with blood! 
Ghosts, look, thronging the entrance, thronging the court, 
go trooping down to the realm of death and darkness! 
The sun is blotted out of the sky — look there — 
a lethal mist spreads all across the earth! " 
At that 
they all broke into peals of laughter aimed at the seer — 
Polybus' son Eurymachus braying first and foremost, 
"Our guest just in from abroad, the man is raving! 
Quick, my boys, hustle him out of the house, 
into the meeting grounds, the light of day — 
everything Aerehe thinks is dark as night!" 
"Eurymachus," the inspired prophet countered, 
"when 1 want your escort, I'll ask for it myself. 
1 have eyes and ears, and both my feet, still, 
and a head that's fairly sound, 
nothing to be ashamed of. These will do 
to take me past those doors ... 
Oh 1 can see it now — 
the disaster closing on you all! There's no escaping it, 
no way out — not for a single one of you suitors, 
wild reckless fools, plotting outrage here, 
the halls of Odysseus, great and strong as a god!" 
With that he marched out of the sturdy house 
and went home to Piraeus, the host who warmed him in. 
Now all the suitors, trading their snide glances, started 
heckling Telemachus, made a mockery of his guests. 
One or another brash young gallant scoffed, 
"Telemachus, no one's more unlucky with his guests!" 
"Look what your man dragged in — this mangy tramp 
scraping for bread and wine!" 
"Not fit for good hard work, 
the bag of bones — " 
"A useless dead weight on the land! " 
"And then this charlatan up and apes the prophet." 
"Take it from me — you'll be better off by far — 
toss your friends in a slave-ship — " 
"Pack them off 
to Sicily, fast — they'll fetch you one sweet price!" 
So they jeered, but the prince paid no attention ... 
silent, eyes riveted on his father, always waiting 
the moment he'd lay hands on that outrageous mob. 
And all the while Icarius' daughter, wise Penelope, 
had placed her carved chair within earshot, at the door, 
so she could catch each word they uttered in the hall. 
Laughing rowdily, men prepared their noonday meal, 
succulent, rich — ^they'd butchered quite a herd. 
But as for supper, what could be less enticing 
than what a goddess and a powerful man 
would spread before them soon? A groaning feast — 
for they'd been first to plot their vicious crimes. 
Odysseus Strings 
His Bow 
The time had come. The goddess Athena with her blazing eyes 
inspired Penelope, Icarius' daughter, wary, poised, 
to set the bow and the gleaming iron axes out 
before her suitors waiting in Odysseus' hall — 
to test their skill and bring their slaughter on. 
Up the steep stairs to her room she climbed 
and grasped in a steady hand the curved key — 
fine bronze, with ivory haft attached — 
and then with her chamber-women made her way 
to a hidden storeroom, far in the palace depths, 
and there they lay, the royal master's treasures: 
bronze, gold and a wealth of hard wrought iron 
and there it lay as well ... his backsprung bow 
with its quiver bristling arrows, shafts of pain. 
Gifts from the old days, from a friend he'd met 
in Lacedaemon — Iphitus, Eurytus' gallant son. 
Once in Messene the two struck up together, 
in sly Ortilochus' house, that time Odysseus 
went to collect a debt the whole realm owed him, 
for Messenian raiders had lifted flocks from Ithaca, 
three hundred head in their oarswept ships, the herdsmen too. 
So his father and island elders sent Odysseus off, 
a young boy on a mission, 
a distant embassy made to right that wrong. 
Iphitus went there hunting the stock that Jiehad lost, 
a dozen mares still nursing their hardy suckling mules. 
The same mares that would prove his certain death 
when he reached the son of Zeus, that iron heart, 
Heracles — the past master of monstrous works — 
who killed the man, a guest in his own house. 
Brutal. Not a care for the wrathful eyes of god 
or rites of hospitality he had spread before him, 
no, he dined him, then he murdered him, commandeered 
those hard-hoofed mares for the hero's own grange. 
Still on the trail of these when he met Odysseus, 
Iphitus gave him the bow his father, mighty Eurytus, 
used to wield as a young man, but when he died 
in his lofty house he left it to his son. 
In turn, Odysseus gave his friend a sharp sword 
and a rugged spear to mark the start of friendship, 
treasured ties that bind. But before they got to know 
the warmth of each other's board, the son of Zeus 
had murdered Iphitus, Eurytus' magnificent son 
who gave the prince the bow. 
That great weapon — 
King Odysseus never took it abroad with him 
when he sailed off to war in his long black ships. 
He kept it stored away in his stately house, 
guarding the memory of a cherished friend, 
and only took that bow on hunts at home. 
Now, 
the lustrous queen soon reached the hidden vault 
and stopped at the oaken doorsill, work an expert 
sanded smooth and trued to the Une some years ago, 
planting the doorjambs snugly, hanging shining doors. 
At once she loosed the thong from around its hook, 
inserted the key and aiming straight and true, 
shot back the bolts — and the rasping doors groaned 
as loud as a bull will bellow, champing grass at pasture. 
So as the key went home those handsome double doors 
rang out now and sprang wide before her. 
She stepped onto a plank where chests stood tall, 
brimming with clothing scented sweet with cedar. 
Reaching, tiptoe, lifting the bow down off its peg, 
still secure in the burnished case that held it, 
down she sank, laying the case across her knees, 
and dissolved in tears with a high thin wail 
as she drew her husband's weapon from its sheath ... 
Then, having wept and sobbed to her heart's content, 
off she went to the hall to meet her proud admirers, 
cradling her husband's backsprung bow in her arms, 
its quiver bristling arrows, shafts of pain. 
Her women followed, bringing a chest that held 
the bronze and the iron axes, trophies won by the master. 
That radiant woman, once she reached her suitors, 
drawing her glistening veil across her cheeks, 
paused now where a column propped the sturdy roof, 
with one of her loyal handmaids stationed either side, 
and delivered an ultimatum to her suitors: 
"Listen to me, my overbearing friends! 
You who plague this palace night and day, 
drinking, eating us out of house and home 
with the lord and master absent, gone so long — 
the only excuse that you can offer is your zest 
to win me as your bride. So, to arms, my gallants! 
Here is the prize at issue, right before you, look — 
1 set before you the great bow of King Odysseus now! 
The hand that can string this bow with greatest ease, 
that shoots an arrow clean through all twelve axes — 
he is the man 1 follow, yes, forsaking this house 
where 1 was once a bride, this gracious house 
so filled with the best that life can offer — 
1 shall always remember it, that I know ... 
even in my dreams." 
She turned to Eumaeus, 
ordered the good swineherd now to set the bow 
and the gleaming iron axes out before the suitors. 
He broke into tears as he received them, laid them down. 
The cowherd wept too, when he saw his master's bow. 
But Antinous wheeled on both and let them have it: 
"Yokels, fools — you can't tell night from day! 
You mawkish idiots, why are you sniveling here? 
You're stirring up your mistress! Isn't she drowned 
in grief already? She's lost her darling husband. 
Sit down. Eat in peace, or take your snuffling 
out of doors! But leave that bow right here — 
our crucial test that makes or breaks us all. 
No easy game, 1 wager, to string A75 polished bow. 
Not a soul in the crowd can match Odysseus — 
what a man he was ... 
1 saw him once, remember him to this day, 
though 1 was young and foolish way back then." 
Smooth talk, 
but deep in the suitor's heart his hopes were bent 
on stringing the bow and shooting through the axes. 
Antinous — fated to be the first man to taste 
an arrow whipped from great Odysseus' hands, 
the king he mocked, at ease in the king's house, 
egging comrades on to mock him too. 
"Amazing!" 
Prince Telemachus waded in with a laugh: 
"Zeus up there has robbed me of my wits. 
My own dear mother, sensible as she is, 
says she'll marry again, forsake our house, 
and look at /ne— laughing for all I'm worth, 
giggling like some fool. Step up, my friends! 
Here is the prize at issue, right before you, look — 
a woman who has no equal now in all Achaean country, 
neither in holy Pylos, nor in Argos or Mycenae, 
not even Ithaca itself or the loamy mainland. 
You know it well. Why sing my mother 's praises? 
Come, let the games begin! No dodges, no delays, 
no turning back from the stringing of the bow — 
we'll see who wins, we will. 
I'd even take a crack at the bow myself ... 
If 1 string it and shoot through all the axes, 
I'd worry less if my noble mother left our house 
with another man and left me here behind — man enough 
at last to win my father's splendid prizes!" 
With that 
he leapt to his feet and dropped his bright red cloak, 
slipping the sword and sword-belt off his shoulders. 
First he planted the axes, digging a long trench, 
one for all, and trued them all to a line, 
then tamped the earth to bed them. Wonder took 
the revelers looking on: his work so firm, precise, 
though he'd never seen the axes ranged before. 
He stood at the threshold, poised to try the bow ... 
Three times he made it shudder, straining to bend it, 
three times his power flagged — but his hopes ran high 
he'd string his father's bow and shoot through every iron 
and now, struggling with all his might for the fourth time, 
he wouJdhave strung the bow, but Odysseus shook his head 
and stopped him short despite his tensing zeal. 
"God help me," the inspired prince cried out, 
"must 1 be a weakling, a failure all my life? 
Unless I'm just too young to trust my hands 
to fight off any man who rises up against me. 
Come, my betters, so much stronger than /am — 
try the bow and finish off the contest." 
He propped his father's weapon on the ground, 
tilting it up against the polished well-hung doors 
and resting a shaft aslant the bow's fine horn, 
then back he went to the seat that he had left. 
"Up, friends!" Antinous called, taking over. 
"One man after another, left to right. 
starting from where the steward pours the wine. " 
So Antinous urged and all agreed. 
The first man up was Leodes, Oenops' son, 
a seer who could see their futures in the smoke, 
who always sat by the glowing winebowl, well back, 
the one man in the group who loathed their reckless ways, 
appalled by all their outrage. His turn first ... 
Picking up the weapon now and the swift arrow, 
he stood at the threshold, poised to try the bow 
but failed to bend it. As soon as he tugged the string 
his hands went slack, his soft, uncallused hands, 
and he called back to the suitors, "Friends, 
/can't bend it. Take it, someone — try. 
Here is a bow to rob our best of life and breath, 
all our best contenders! Still, better be dead 
than live on here, never winning the prize 
that tempts us all — forever in pursuit, 
burning with expectation every day. 
If there's still a suitor here who hopes, 
who aches to marry Penelope, Odysseus' wife, 
just let him try the bow; he'll see the truth! 
He'll soon lay siege to another Argive woman 
trailing her long robes, and shower her with gifts — 
and then our queen can marry the one who offers most, 
the man marked out by fate to be her husband. " 
With those words he thrust the bow aside, 
tilting it up against the polished well-hung doors 
and resting a shaft aslant the bow's fine horn, 
then back he went to the seat that he had left. 
But Antinous turned on the seer, abuses flying: 
"Leodes! what are you saying? what's got past your lips? 
What awful, grisly nonsense — it shocks me to hear it — 
'here is a bow to rob our best of life and breath!' 
Just because can't string it, you're, so weak? 
Clearly your genteel mother never bred her boy 
for the work of bending bows and shooting arrows. 
We have champions in our ranks to string it quickly. 
Hop to it, Melanthius!" — he barked at the goatherd — 
"Rake the fire in the hall, pull up a big stool, 
heap it with fleece and fetch that hefty ball 
of lard from the stores inside. So we young lords 
can heat and limber the bow and rub it down with grease 
before we try again and finish off the contest!" 
The goatherd bustled about to rake the fire 
still going strong. He pulled up a big stool, 
heaped it with fleece and fetched the hefty ball 
of lard from the stores inside. And the young men 
limbered the bow, rubbing it down with hot grease, 
then struggled to bend it back but failed. No use — 
they fell far short of the strength the bow required. 
Antinous still held off, dashing Eurymachus too, 
the ringleaders of all the suitors, 
head and shoulders the strongest of the lot. 
But now 
the king's two men, the cowherd and the swineherd, 
had slipped out of the palace side-by-side 
and great Odysseus left the house to join them. 
Once they were past the courtyard and the gates 
he probed them deftly, surely: "Cowherd, swineherd, 
what, shall 1 blurt this out or keep it to myself? 
No, speak out. The heart inside me says so. 
How far would you go to fight beside Odysseus? 
Say he dropped like tJiat from a clear blue sky 
and a god brought him back — 
would you fight for the suitors or your king? 
Tell me how you feel inside your hearts." 
"Father Zeus," the trusty cowherd shouted, 
"bring my prayer to pass! Let the master come — 
some god guide him now! You'd see my power, 
my fighting arms in action!" 
Eumaeus echoed his prayer to all the gods 
that their wise king would soon come home again. 
Certain at least these two were loyal to the death, 
Odysseus reassured them quickly: "I'm right here, 
here in the flesh — myself — and home at last, 
after bearing twenty years of brutal hardship. 
Now 1 know that of all my men you two alone 
longed for my return. From the rest I've heard 
not one real prayer that 1 come back again. 
So now I'll tell you what's in store for you. 
If a god beats down the lofty suitors at my hands, 
I'll find you wives, both of you, grant you property, 
sturdy houses beside my own, and in my eyes you'll be 
comrades to Prince Telemachus, brothers from then on. 
Come, I'll show you something — living proof — 
know me for certain, put your minds at rest. 
This scar, 
look, where a boar's white tusk gored me, years ago, 
hunting on Parnassus, Autolycus' sons and 1. ' 
With that, 
pushing back his rags, he revealed the great scar ... 
And the men gazed at it, scanned it, knew it well, 
broke into tears and threw their arms around their master — 
lost in affection, kissing his head and shoulders, 
and so Odysseus kissed their heads and hands. 
Now the sun would have set upon their tears 
if Odysseus had not called a halt himself. 
"No more weeping. Coming out of the house 
a man might see us, tell the men inside. 
Let's slip back in — singly, not in a pack. 
I'll go first. You're next. Here's our signal. 
When all the rest in there, our lordly friends, 
are dead against my having the bow and quiver, 
good Eumaeus, carry the weapon down the hall 
and put it in my hands. Then tell the serving-women 
to lock the snugly fitted doors to their own rooms. 
If anyone hears from there the jolting blows 
and groans of men, caught in our huge net, 
not one of them show her face — 
sit tight, keep to her weaving, not a sound. 
You, my good Philoetius, here are your orders. 
Shoot the bolt of the courtyard's outer gate, 
lock it, lash it fast." 
With that command 
the master entered his well-constructed house 
and back he went to the stool that he had left. 
The king's two men, in turn, slipped in as well. 
Just now Eurymachus held the bow in his hands, 
turning it over, tip to tip, before the blazing fire 
to heat the weapon. But he failed to bend it even so 
and the suitor's high heart groaned to bursting. 
"A black day , " he exclaimed in wounded pride, 
"a blow to myself, a blow to each man here! 
It's less the marriage that mortifies me now — 
that's galling too, but lots of women are left, 
some in seagirt Ithaca, some in other cities. 
What breaks my heart is the fact we fall so short 
of great Odysseus' strength we cannot string his bow. 
A disgrace to ring in the ears of men to come." 
"Eurymachus," Eupithes' son Antinous countered, 
"it will never come to that, as you well know. 
Today is a feast-day up and down the island 
in honor of the Archer God. Who flexes bows today? 
Set it aside. Rest easy now. And all the axes, 
let's just leave them planted where they are. 
Trust me, no one's about to crash the gates 
of Laertes' son and carry off these trophies. 
Steward, pour some drops for the god in every cup, 
we'll tip the wine, then put the bow to bed. 
And first thing in the morning have Melanthius 
bring the pick of his goats from all his herds 
so we can burn the thighs to Apollo, god of archers — 
then try the bow and finish off the contest." 
Welcome advice. And again they all agreed. 
Heralds sprinkled water over their hands for rinsing, 
the young men brimmed the mixing bowls with wine, 
they tipped first drops for the god in every cup, 
then poured full rounds for all. And now, once 
they'd tipped libations out and drunk their fill, 
the king of craft, Odysseus, said with all his cunning, 
"Listen to me, you lords who court the noble queen. 
1 have to say what the heart inside me urges. 
1 appeal especially to Eurymachus, and you, 
brilliant Antinous, who spoke so shrewdly now. 
Give the bow a rest for today, leave it to the gods — 
at dawn the Archer God will grant a victory 
to the man he favors most. 
For the moment, 
give me the polished bow now, won't you? So, 
to amuse you all, 1 can try my hand, my strength ... 
is the old force still alive inside these gnarled limbs? 
Or has a life of roaming, years of rough neglect, 
destroyed it long ago?" 
Modest words 
that sent them all into hot, indignant rage, 
fearing he just might string the polished bow. 
So Antinous rounded on him, dressed him down: 
"Not a shred of sense in your head, you filthy drifter! 
Not content to feast at your ease with us, the island's pride? 
Never denied your full share of the banquet, never, 
you can listen in on our secrets. No one else 
can eavesdrop on our talk, no tramp, no beggar. 
The wine has overpowered you, heady wine — 
the ruin of many another man, whoever 
gulps it down and drinks beyond his limit. 
Wine — it drove the Centaur, famous Eurytion, 
mad in the halls of lionhearted Pirithous. 
There to visit the Lapiths, crazed with wine 
the headlong Centaur bent to his ugly work 
in the prince's own house! His hosts sprang up, 
seized with fury, dragged him across the forecourt, 
flung him out of doors, hacking his nose and ears off 
with their knives, no mercy. The creature reeled away, 
still blind with drink, his heart like a wild storm, 
loaded with all the frenzy in his mind! 
And so 
the feud between mortal men and Centaurs had its start. 
But the drunk was first to bring disaster on himself 
by drowning in his cups. You too, 1 promise you 
no end of trouble if you should string that bow. 
You'll meet no kindness in our part of the world — 
we'll sail you off in a black ship to Echetus, 
the mainland king who wrecks all men alive. 
Nothing can save you from his royal grip! 
So drink, but hold your peace, 
don't take on the younger, stronger men. " 
"Antinous, " watchful Penelope stepped in, 
"how impolite it would be, how wrong, to scant 
whatever guest Telemachus welcomes to his house. 
You really think — if the stranger trusts so to his hands 
and strength that he strings Odysseus' great bow — 
he'll take me home and claim me as his bride? 
/fe never dreamed of such a thing, I'm sure. 
Don't let that ruin the feast for any reveler here. 
Unthinkable — nothing, nothing could be worse." 
Polybus' son Eurymachus had an answer: 
"Wise Penelope, daughter of Icarius, do we really 
expect the man to wed you? Unthinkable, 1 know. 
But we do recoil at the talk of men and women. 
One of the island's meaner sort will mutter, 
'Look at the riffraff courting a king's wife. 
Weaklings, look, they can't even string his bow. 
But along came this beggar, drifting out of the blue — 
strung his bow with ease and shot through all the axes!' 
Gossip will fly. We'll hang our heads in shame." 
"Shame?' alert Penelope protested — 
"How can you hope for any public fame at all? 
You who disgrace, devour a great man's house and home! 
Why hang your heads in shame over next to nothing? 
Our friend here is a strapping, well-built man 
and claims to be the son of a noble father. 
Come, hand him the bow now, let's just see ... 
1 tell you this — and I'll make good my word — 
if he strings the bow and Apollo grants him glory, 
I'll dress him in shirt and cloak, in handsome clothes, 
I'll give him a good sharp lance to fight off men and dogs, 
give him a two-edged sword and sandals for his feet 
and send him off, wherever his heart desires." 
"Mother," 
poised Telemachus broke in now, "my father's bow — 
no Achaean on earth has more right than 1 
to give it or withhold it, as 1 please. 
Of all the lords in Ithaca's rocky heights 
or the islands facing Elis grazed by horses, 
not a single one will force or thwart my will, 
even if 1 decide to give our guest \Ms bow — 
a gift outright — to carry off himself. 
So, mother, 
go back to your quarters. Tend to your own tasks, 
the distaff and the loom, and keep the women 
working hard as well. As for the bow now, 
men will see to that, but 1 most of all: 
/hold the reins of power in this house. " 
Astonished, 
she withdrew to her own room. She took to heart 
the clear good sense in what her son had said. 
Climbing up to the lofty chamber with her women, 
she fell to weeping for Odysseus, her beloved husband, 
till watchful Athena sealed her eyes with welcome sleep. 
And now the loyal swineherd had lifted up the bow, 
was taking it toward the king, when all the suitors 
burst out in an ugly uproar through the palace — 
brash young bullies, this or that one heckling, 
"Where on earth are you going with that bow?" 
"You, you grubby swineherd, are you crazy?" 
"The speedy dogs you reared will eat your corpse — " 
"Out there with your pigs, out in the cold, alone!" 
"If only Apollo and all the gods shine down on us!' 
Eumaeus froze in his tracks, put down the bow, 
panicked by every outcry in the hall. 
Telemachus shouted too, from the other side, 
and full of threats: "Carry on with the bow, old boy! 
If you serve too many masters, you'll soon suffer. 
Look sharp, or I'll pelt you back to your farm 
with flying rocks. 1 may be younger than you 
but I'm much stronger. If only 1 had that edge 
in fists and brawn over all this courting crowd, 
I'd soon dispatch them — licking their wounds at last — 
clear of our palace where they plot their vicious plots!" 
His outburst sent them all into gales of laughter, 
blithe and oblivious, that dissolved their pique 
against the prince. The swineherd took the bow, 
carried it down the hall to his ready, waiting king 
and standing by him, placed it in his hands, 
then he called the nurse aside and whispered, 
"Good Eurycleia — ^Telemachus commands you now 
to lock the snugly fitted doors to your own rooms. 
If anyone hears from there the jolting blows 
and groans of men, caught in our huge net, 
not one of you show your face — 
sit tight, keep to your weaving, not a sound. " 
That silenced the old nurse — 
she barred the doors that led from the long hall. 
The cowherd quietly bounded out of the house 
to lock the gates of the high-stockaded court. 
Under the portico lay a cable, ship's tough gear: 
he lashed the gates with this, then slipped back in 
and ran and sat on the stool that he'd just left, 
eyes riveted on Odysseus. 
Now heheld the bow 
in his own hands, turning it over, tip to tip, 
testing it, this way, that way ... fearing worms 
had bored through the weapon's horn with the master gone abroad. 
A suitor would glance at his neighbor, jeering, taunting, 
"Look at our connoisseur of bows! " 
"Sly old fox- 
maybe he's got bows like it, stored in Az? house." 
"That or he's bent on making one himself." 
"Look how he twists and turns it in his hands!" 
"The clever tramp means trouble — " 
"1 wish him luck," some cocksure lord chimed in, 
"as good as his luck in bending back that weapon!" 
So they mocked, but Odysseus, mastermind in action, 
once he'd handled the great bow and scanned every inch, 
then, like an expert singer skilled at lyre and song — 
who strains a string to a new peg with ease, 
making the pliant sheep-gut fast at either end — 
so with his virtuoso ease Odysseus strung his mighty bow. 
Quickly his right hand plucked the string to test its pitch 
and under his touch it sang out clear and sharp as a swallow's cry. 
Horror swept through the suitors, faces blanching white, 
and Zeus cracked the sky with a bolt, his blazing sign, 
and the great man who had borne so much rejoiced at last 
that the son of cunning Cronus flung that omen down for him. 
He snatched a winged arrow lying bare on the board — 
the rest still bristled deep inside the quiver, 
soon to be tasted by all the feasters there. 
Setting shaft on the handgrip, drawing the notch 
and bowstring back, back ... right from his stool, 
just as he sat but aiming straight and true, he let fly — 
and never missing an ax from the first ax-handle 
clean on through to the last and out 
the shaft with its weighted brazen head shot free! 
"My son," 
Odysseus looked to Telemachus and said, "your guest, 
sitting here in your house, has not disgraced you. 
No missing the mark, look, and no long labor spent 
to string the bow. My strength's not broken yet, 
not quite so frail as the mocking suitors thought. 
But the hour has come to serve our masters right — 
supper in broad daylight — then to other revels, 
song and dancing, all that crowns a feast." 
He paused with a warning nod, and at that sign 
Prince Telemachus, son of King Odysseus, 
girding his sharp sword on, clamping hand to spear, 
took his stand by a chair that flanked his father — 
his bronze spearpoint glinting now like fire ... 
Slaughter in 
the Hall 
Now stripping back his rags Odysseus master of craft and battle 
vaulted onto the great threshold, gripping his bow and quiver 
bristling arrows, and poured his flashing shafts before him, 
loose at his feet, and thundered out to all the suitors: 
"Look — your crucial test is finished, now, at last! 
But another target's left that no one's hit before — 
we'll see if /can hit it — ^Apollo give me glory!" 
With that he trained a stabbing arrow on Antinous ... 
just lifting a gorgeous golden loving-cup in his hands, 
just tilting the two-handled goblet back to his lips, 
about to drain the wine — and slaughter the last thing 
on the suitor's mind: who could dream that one foe 
in that crowd of feasters, however great his power, 
would bring down death on himself, and black doom? 
But Odysseus aimed and shot Antinous square in the throat 
and the point went stabbing clean through the soft neck and out — 
and off to the side he pitched, the cup dropped from his grasp 
as the shaft sank home, and the man's life-blood came spurting 
out his nostrils — 
thick red jets — 
a sudden thrust of his foot — 
he kicked away the table — 
food showered across the floor, 
the bread and meats soaked in a swirl of bloody filth. 
The suitors burst into uproar all throughout the house 
when they saw their leader down. They leapt from their seats, 
milling about, desperate, scanning the stone walls — 
not a shield in sight, no rugged spear to seize. 
They wheeled on Odysseus, lashing out in fury: 
"Stranger, shooting at men will cost your life!" 
"Your game is over — you, you've shot your last!" 
"You'll never escape your own headlong death!" 
"You killed the best in Ithaca — our fine prince!" 
"Vultures will eat your corpse!" 
Groping, frantic — 
each one persuading himself the guest had killed 
the man by chance. Poor fools, blind to the fact 
that all their necks were in the noose, their doom sealed. 
With a dark look, the wily fighter Odysseus shouted back, 
"You dogs! you never imagined I'd return from Troy — 
so cocksure that you bled my house to death, 
ravished my serving-women — ^wooed my wife 
behind my back while 1 was still alive! 
No fear of the gods who rule the skies up there, 
no fear that men's revenge might arrive someday — 
now all your necks are in the noose — your doom is sealed!" 
Terror gripped them all, blanched their faces white, 
each man glancing wildly — how to escape his instant death? 
Only Eurymachus had the breath to venture, "If you, 
you're truly Odysseus of Ithaca, home at last, 
you're right to accuse these men of what they've done — 
so much reckless outrage here in your palace, 
so much on your lands. But here he lies, 
quite dead, and he incited it all — ^Antinous — 
look, the man who drove us all to crime! 
Not that he needed marriage, craved it so; 
he'd bigger game in mind — though Zeus barred his way — 
he'd lord it over Ithaca's handsome country, king himself, 
once he'd lain in wait for your son and cut him down! 
But now he's received the death that he deserved. 
So spare your own people! Later we'll recoup 
your costs with a tax laid down upon the land, 
covering all we ate and drank inside your halls, 
and each of us here will pay full measure too — 
twenty oxen in value, bronze and gold we'll give 
until we melt your heart. Before we've settled, 
who on earth could blame you for your rage?" 
But the battle-master kept on glaring, seething. 
"No, Eurymachus! Not if you paid me all your father's wealth — 
all you possess now, and all that could pour in from the world's end — 
no, not even then would 1 stay my hands from slaughter 
till all you suitors had paid for all your crimes! 
Now life or death — your choice — fight me or flee 
if you hope to escape your sudden bloody doom! 
1 doubt one man in the lot will save his skin!" 
His menace shook their knees, their hearts too 
but Eurymachus spoke again, now to the suitors: "Friends! 
This man will never restrain his hands, invincible hands — 
now that he's seized that polished bow and quiver, look, 
he'll shoot from the sill until he's killed us all! 
So fight — call up the joy of battle! Swords out! 
Tables lifted — block his arrows winging death! 
Charge him, charge in a pack — 
try to rout the man from the sill, the doors, 
race through town and sound an alarm at once — 
our friend would soon see he's shot his bolt!" 
Brave talk — 
he drew his two-edged sword, bronze, honed for the kill 
and hurled himself at the king with a raw savage cry 
in the same breath that Odysseus loosed an arrow 
ripping his breast beside the nipple so hard 
it lodged in the man's liver — 
Out of his grasp the sword dropped to the ground — 
over his table, head over heels he tumbled, doubled up, 
flinging his food and his two-handled cup across the floor — 
he smashed the ground with his forehead, writhing in pain, 
both feet flailing out, and his high seat tottered — 
the mist of death came swirling down his eyes. 
Amphinomus rushed the king in all his glory, 
charging him face-to-face, a slashing sword drawn — 
if only he could force him clear of the doorway, now, 
but Telemachus — too quick — stabbed the man from behind, 
plunging his bronze spear between the suitor's shoulders 
and straight on through his chest the point came jutting out — 
down he went with a thud, his forehead slammed the ground. 
Telemachus swerved aside, leaving his long spearshaft 
lodged in Amphinomus — fearing some suitor just might 
lunge in from behind as he tugged the shaft, 
impale him with a sword or hack him down, 
crouching over the corpse. 
He went on the run, reached his father at once 
and halting right beside him, let fly, "Father — 
now I'll get you a shield and a pair of spears, 
a helmet of solid bronze to fit your temples! 
I'll arm myself on the way back and hand out 
arms to the swineherd, arm the cowherd too — 
we'd better fight equipped!" 
"Run, fetch them," 
the wily captain urged, "while I've got arrows left 
to defend me — or they 'll force me from the doors 
while 1 fight on alone!" 
Telemachus moved to his father's orders smartly. 
Off he ran to the room where the famous arms lay stored, 
took up four shields, eight spears, four bronze helmets 
ridged with horsehair crests and, loaded with these, 
ran back to reach his father's side in no time. 
The prince was first to case himself in bronze 
and his servants followed suit — both harnessed up 
and all three flanked Odysseus, mastermind of war, 
and he, as long as he'd arrows left to defend himself, 
kept picking suitors off in the palace, one by one 
and down they went, corpse on corpse in droves. 
Then, when the royal archer's shafts ran out, 
he leaned his bow on a post of the massive doors — 
where walls of the hallway catch the light — and armed: 
across his shoulder he slung a buckler four plies thick, 
over his powerful head he set a well-forged helmet, 
the horsehair crest atop it tossing, bristling terror, 
and grasped two rugged lances tipped with fiery bronze. 
Now a side-door was fitted into the main wall — 
right at the edge of the great hall's stone sill — 
and led to a passage always shut by good tight boards. 
But Odysseus gave the swineherd strict commands 
to stand hard by the side-door, guard it well — 
the only way the suitors might break out. 
Agelaus called to his comrades with a plan: 
"Friends, can't someone climb through the hatch? — 
tell men outside to sound the alarm, be quick — 
our guest would soon see he'd shot his last!" 
The goatherd Melanthius answered, "Not a chance, 
my lord — the door to the courtyard's much too near, 
dangerous too, the mouth of the passage cramped. 
One strong man could block us, one and all! 
No, I'll fetch you some armor to harness on, 
out of the storeroom — ^there, nowhere else, I'm sure, 
the king and his gallant son have stowed their arms!" 
With that the goatherd clambered up through smoke-ducts 
high on the wall arid scurried into Odysseus' storeroom, 
bundled a dozen shields, as many spears and helmets 
ridged with horsehair crests and, loaded with these, 
rushed back down to the suitors, quickly issued arms. 
Odysseus' knees shook, his heart too, when he saw them 
buckling on their armor, brandishing long spears — 
here was a battle looming, well he knew. 
He turned at once to Telemachus, warnings flying: 
"A bad break in the fight, my boy! One of the women's 
tipped the odds against us — or could it be the goatherd? " 
"My fault, father," the cool clear prince replied, 
"the blame's all mine. That snug door to the vault, 
1 left it ajar — they've kept a better watch than 1. 
Go, Eumaeus, shut the door to the storeroom, 
check and see if it's one of the women's tricks 
or Dolius' son Melanthius. He's our man, I'd say." 
And even as they conspired, back the goatherd 
climbed to the room to fetch more burnished arms, 
but Eumaeus spotted him, quickly told his king 
who stood close by: "Odysseus, wily captain, 
there he goes again, the infernal nuisance — 
just as we suspected — back to the storeroom. 
Give me a clear command! 
Do 1 kill the man — if 1 can take him down — 
or drag him back to you, here, to pay in full 
for the dirty work he's plotted in your house?" 
Odysseus, master of tactics, answered briskly, 
"1 and the prince will keep these brazen suitors 
crammed in the hall, for all their battle-fury. 
You two wrench Melanthius' arms and legs behind him, 
fling him down in the storeroom — lash his back to a plank 
and strap a twisted cable fast to the scoundrel's body, 
hoist him up a column until he hits the rafters — 
let him dangle in agony, still alive, 
for a good long time!" 
They hung on his orders, keen to do his will. 
Off they ran to the storeroom, unseen by him inside — 
Melanthius, rummaging after arms, deep in a dark recess 
as the two men took their stand, either side the doorposts, 
poised till the goatherd tried to cross the doorsill ... 
one hand clutching a crested helmet, the other 
an ample old buckler blotched with mildew, 
the shield Laertes bore as a young soldier once — 
but there it lay for ages, seams on the handstraps split — 
Quick, they rushed him, seized him, haled him back by the hair, 
flung him down on the floor, writhing with terror, bound him 
hand and foot with a chafing cord, wrenched his limbs 
back, back till the joints locked tight — 
just as Laertes' cunning son commanded — 
they strapped a twisted cable round his body, 
hoisted him up a column until he hit the rafters, 
then you mocked him, Eumaeus, my good swineherd: 
"Now stand guard through the whole night, Melanthius — 
stretched out on a soft bed fit for you, your highness! 
You're bound to see the Morning rising up from the Ocean, 
mounting her golden throne — at just the hour you always 
drive in goats to feast the suitors in the hall!" 
So they left him, trussed in his agonizing sling; 
they clapped on armor again, shut the gleaming doors 
and ran to rejoin Odysseus, mastermind of war. 
And now as the ranks squared off, breathing fury — 
four at the sill confronting a larger, stronger force 
arrayed inside the hall — now Zeus's daughter Athena, 
taking the build and voice of Mentor, swept in 
and Odysseus, thrilled to see her, cried out, 
"Rescue us. Mentor, now it's life or death! 
Remember your old comrade — all the service 
1 offered you/ We were boys together!" 
So he cried 
yet knew in his bones it was Athena, Driver of Armies. 
But across the hall the suitors brayed against her, 
Agelaus first, his outburst full of threats: 
"Mentor, never let Odysseus trick you into 
siding with Jii'mio fight against the suitors. 
Here's our plan of action, and we will see it through! 
Once we've killed them both, the father and the son, 
we'll kill you too, for all you're bent on doing 
here in the halls — you'll pay with your own head! 
And once our swords have stopped your violence cold — 
all your property, all in your house, your fields, 
we'll lump it all with Odysseus' rich estate 
and never let your sons live on in your halls 
or free your wife and daughters to walk through town!" 
Naked threats — and Athena hit new heights of rage, 
she lashed out at Odysseus now with blazing accusations: 
"Where's it gone, Odysseus — your power, your fighting heart? 
The great soldier who fought for famous white-armed Helen, 
battling Trojans nine long years — nonstop, no mercy, 
mowing their armies down in grueling battle — 
you who seized the broad streets of Troy 
with your fine strategic stroke! How can you — 
now you've returned to your own house, your own wealth — 
bewail the loss of your combat strength in a war with suitors? 
Come, old friend, stand by me! You'll see action now, 
see how Mentor the son of Alcimus, that brave fighter, 
kills your enemies, pays you back for service!" 
Rousing words — 
but she gave no all-out turning of the tide, not yet, 
she kept on testing Odysseus and his gallant son, 
putting their force and fighting heart to proof. 
For all the world like a swallow in their sight 
she flew on high to perch 
on the great hall's central roof beam black with smoke. 
But the suitors closed ranks, commanded now by Damastor's 
sonAgelaus, flanked by Eurynomus, Demoptolemus and Amphimedon, 
Pisander, Polyctor's son, and Poly bus ready, waiting — 
head and shoulders the best and bravest of the lot 
still left to fight for their lives, 
now that the pelting shafts had killed the rest. 
Agelaus spurred his comrades on with battle-plans: 
"Friends, at last the man's invincible hands are useless! 
Mentor has mouthed some empty boasts and flitted off — 
just four are left to fight at the front doors. So now, 
no wasting your long spears — all at a single hurl, 
just six of us launch out in the first wave! 
If Zeus is willing, we may hit Odysseus, 
carry off the glory! The rest are nothing 
once the captain's down!" 
At his command, 
concentrating their shots, all six hurled as one 
but Athena sent the whole salvo wide of the mark — 
one of them hit the jamb of the great hall's doors, 
another the massive door itself, and the heavy bronze point 
of a third ashen javelin crashed against the wall. 
Seeing his men untouched by the suitors' flurry, 
steady Odysseus leapt to take command: 
"Friends! now it's for usto hurl at them, 1 say, 
into this ruck of suitors! Topping all their crimes 
they're mad to strip the armor off our bodies!" 
Taking aim at the ranks, all four let fly as one 
and the lances struck home — Odysseus killed Demoptolemus, 
Telemachus killed Euryades — the swineherd. Flatus — 
and the cowherd cut Pisander down in blood. 
They bit the dust of the broad floor, all as one. 
Back to the great hall's far recess the others shrank 
as the four rushed in and plucked up spears from corpses. 
And again the suitors hurled their whetted shafts 
but Athena sent the better part of the salvo wide — 
one of them hit the jamb of the great hall's doors, 
another the massive door itself, and the heavy bronze point 
of a third ashen javelin crashed against the wall. 
True, Amphimedon nicked Telemachus on the wrist — 
the glancing blade just barely broke his skin. 
Ctesippus sent a long spear sailing over 
Eumaeus' buckler, grazing his shoulder blade 
but the weapon skittered off and hit the ground. 
And again those led by the brilliant battle-master 
hurled their razor spears at the suitors' ranks — 
and now Odysseus raider of cities hit Eurydamas, 
Telemachus hit Amphimedon — Eumaeus, Poly bus — 
and the cowherd stabbed Ctesippus 
right in the man's chest and triumphed over his body: 
"Love your mockery, do you? Son of that blowhard Polytherses! 
No more shooting off your mouth, you idiot, such big talk — 
leave the last word to the gods — they're much stronger! 
Take this spear, this guest-gift, for the cow's hoof 
you once gave King Odysseus begging in his house!" 
So the master of longhorn cattle had his say — 
as Odysseus, fighting at close quarters, ran Agelaus 
through with a long lance — ^Telemachus speared Leocritus 
so deep in the groin the bronze came punching out his back 
and the man crashed headfirst, slamming the ground full-face. 
And now Athena, looming out of the rafters high above them, 
brandished her man-destroying shield of thunder, terrifying 
the suitors out of their minds, and down the hall they panicked — 
wild, like herds stampeding, driven mad as the darting gadfly 
strikes in the late spring when the long days come round. 
The attackers struck like eagles, crook-clawed, hook-beaked, 
swooping down from a mountain ridge to harry smaller birds 
that skim across the flatland, cringing under the clouds 
but the eagles plunge in fury, rip their lives out — hopeless, 
never a chance of flight or rescue — and people love the sport — 
so the attackers routed suitors headlong down the hall, 
wheeling into the slaughter, slashing left and right 
and grisly screams broke from skulls cracked open — 
the whole floor awash with blood. 
Leodes now — 
he flung himself at Odysseus, clutched his knees, 
crying out to the king with a sudden, winging prayer: 
"1 hug your knees, Odysseus — mercy! spare my life! 
Never, 1 swear, did 1 harass any woman in your house — 
never a word, a gesture — nothing, no, 1 tried 
to restrain the suitors, whoever did such things. 
They wouldn't listen, keep their hands to themselves — 
so reckless, so they earn their shameful fate. 
But 1 was just their prophet — 
/72Z/ hands are clean — and I'm to die their death! 
Look at the thanks 1 get for years of service! " 
A killing look, and the wry soldier answered, 
"Only a priest, a prophet for this mob, you say? 
How hard you must have prayed in my own house 
that the heady day of my return would never dawn — 
my dear wife would be yours, would bear your children! 
For ^Aa^there's no escape from grueling death — you die!" 
And snatching up in one powerful hand a sword 
left on the ground — ^Agelaus dropped it when he fell — 
Odysseus hacked the prophet square across the neck 
and the praying head went tumbling in the dust. 
Now one was left, 
trying still to escape black death. Phemius, Terpis' son, 
the bard who always performed among the suitors — 
they forced the man to sing ... 
There he stood, backing into the side-door, 
still clutching his ringing lyre in his hands, 
his mind in turmoil, torn — ^what should he do now? 
Steal from the hall and crouch at the altar-stone 
of Zeus who Guards the Court, where time and again 
Odysseus and Laertes burned the long thighs of oxen? 
Or throw himself on the master's mercy, clasp his knees? 
That was the better way — or so it struck him, yes, 
grasp the knees of Laertes' royal son. And so, 
cradling his hollow lyre, he laid it on the ground 
between the mixing-bowl and the silver-studded throne. 
then rushed up to Odysseus, yes, and clutched his knees, 
singing out to his king with a stirring, winged prayer: 
"I hug your knees, Odysseus — mercy! spare my life! 
What a grief it will be to you for all the years to come 
if you kill the singer now, who sings for gods and men. 
1 taught myself the craft, but a god has planted 
deep in my spirit all the paths of song — 
songs I'm fit to sing for you as for a god. 
Calm your bloodlust now — don't take my head! 
He'd bear me out, your own dear son Telemachus — 
never of /72z/own will, never for any gain did 1 
perform in your house, singing after the suitors 
had their feasts. They were too strong, too many — 
they forced me to come and sing — 1 had no choice! " 
The inspired Prince Telemachus heard his pleas 
and quickly said to his father close beside him, 
"Stop, don't cut him down! This one's innocent. 
So is the herald Medon — the one who always 
tended me in the house when 1 was little — 
spare him too. Unless he's dead by now, 
killed by Philoetius or Eumaeus here — 
or ran into f/f7f/ rampaging through the halls." 
The herald pricked up his anxious ears at that ... 
cautious soul, he cowered, trembling, under a chair — 
wrapped in an oxhide freshly stripped — to dodge black death. 
He jumped in a flash from there, threw off the smelly hide 
and scuttling up to Telemachus, clutching his knees, 
the herald begged for life in words that fluttered: 
"Here 1 am, dear boy — spare me! Tell your father, 
flushed with victory, not to kill me with his sword — 
enraged as he is with these young lords who bled 
his palace white and showed you no respect, 
the reckless fools!" 
Breaking into a smile 
the canny Odysseus reassured him, "Courage! 
The prince has pulled you through, he's saved you now 
so you can take it to heart and tell the next man too: 
clearly doing good puts doing bad to shame. 
Now leave the palace, go and sit outside — 
out in the courtyard, clear of the slaughter — 
you and the bard with all his many songs. 
Wait till I've done some household chores 
that call for my attention." 
The two men scurried out of the house at once 
and crouched at the altar-stone of mighty Zeus — 
glancing left and right, 
fearing death would strike at any moment. 
Odysseus scanned his house to see if any man 
still skulked alive, still hoped to avoid black death. 
But he found them one and all in blood and dust ... 
great hauls of them down and out like fish that fishermen 
drag from the churning gray surf in looped and coiling nets 
and fling ashore on a sweeping hook of beach — some noble catch 
heaped on the sand, twitching, lusting for fresh salt sea 
but the Sungod hammers down and burns their lives out ... 
so the suitors lay in heaps, corpse covering corpse. 
At last the seasoned fighter turned to his son: 
"Telemachus, go, call the old nurse here — 
1 must tell her all that's on my mind." 
Telemachus ran to do his father's bidding, 
shook the women's doors, calling Eury cleia: 
"Come out now! Up with you, good old woman! 
You who watch over all the household hands — 
quick, my father wants you, needs to have a word!" 
Crisp command that left the old nurse hushed — 
she spread the doors to the well-constructed hall, 
slipped out in haste, and the prince led her on ... 
She found Odysseus in the thick of slaughtered corpses, 
splattered with bloody filth like a lion that's devoured 
some ox of the field and lopes home, covered with blood. 
his chest streaked, both jaws gUstening, dripping red — 
a sight to strike terror. So Odysseus looked now, 
splattered with gore, his thighs, his fighting hands, 
and she, when she saw the corpses, all the pooling blood, 
was about to lift a cry of triumph — here was a great exploit, 
look — but the soldier held her back and checked her zeal 
with warnings winging home: "Rejoice in your heart, 
old woman — peace! No cries of triumph now. 
It's unholy to glory over the bodies of the dead. 
These men the doom of the gods has brought low, 
and their own indecent acts. They 'd no regard 
for any man on earth — good or bad — 
who chanced to come their way. And so, thanks 
to their reckless work, they met this shameful fate. 
Quick, report in full on the women in my halls — 
who are disloyal to me, who are guiltless? " 
"Surely, child," 
his fond old nurse replied, "now here's the truth. 
Fifty women you have inside your house, 
women we've trained to do their duties well, 
to card the wool and bear the yoke of service. 
Some dozen in all went tramping to their shame, 
thumbing their noses at me, at the queen herself! 
And Telemachus, just now come of age — his mother 
would never let the boy take charge of the maids. 
But let me climb to her well-lit room upstairs 
and tell your wife the news — 
some god has put the woman fast asleep." 
"Don't wake her yet," the crafty man returned, 
"you tell those women to hurry here at once — 
just the ones who've shamed us all along." 
Away the old nurse bustled through the house 
to give the women orders, rush them to the king. 
Odysseus called Telemachus over, both herdsmen too, 
with strict commands: "Start clearing away the bodies. 
Make the women pitch in too. Chairs and tables — 
scrub them down with sponges, rinse them clean. 
And once you've put the entire house in order, 
march the women out of the great hall — between 
the roundhouse and the courtyard's strong stockade — 
and hack them with your swords, slash out all their lives — 
blot out of their minds the joys of love they relished 
under the suitors' bodies, rutting on the sly ! " 
The women crowded in, huddling all together ... 
wailing convulsively, streaming live warm tears. 
First they carried out the bodies of the dead 
and propped them under the courtyard colonnade, 
standing them one against another. Odysseus 
shouted commands himself, moving things along, 
and they kept bearing out the bodies — they were forced. 
Next they scrubbed down the elegant chairs and tables, 
washed them with sopping sponges, rinsed them clean. 
Then Telemachus and the herdsmen scraped smooth 
the packed earth floor of the royal house with spades 
as the women gathered up the filth and piled it outside. 
And then, at last, once the entire house was put in order, 
they marched the women out of the great hall — between 
the roundhouse and the courtyard's strong stockade — 
crammed them into a dead end, no way out from there, 
and stern Telemachus gave the men their orders: 
"No clean death for the likes of them, by god! 
Not from /ne— they showered abuse on my head, 
my mother's too! 
You sluts — ^the suitors' whores!" 
With that, taking a cable used on a dark-prowed ship 
he coiled it over the roundhouse, lashed it fast to a tall column, 
hoisting it up so high no toes could touch the ground. 
Then, as doves or thrushes beating their spread wings 
against some snare rigged up in thickets — flying in 
for a cozy nest but a grisly bed receives them — 
so the women's heads were trapped in a line, 
nooses yanking their necks up, one by one 
so all might die a pitiful, ghastly death ... 
they kicked up heels for a little — not for long. 
Melanthius? 
They hauled him out through the doorway, into the court, 
lopped his nose and ears with a ruthless knife, 
tore his genitals out for the dogs to eat raw 
and in manic fury hacked off hands and feet. 
Then, 
once they 'd washed their own hands and feet, 
they went inside again to join Odysseus. 
Their work was done with now. 
But the king turned to devoted Eurycleia, saying, 
"Bring sulfur, nurse, to scour all this pollution — 
bring me fire too, so 1 can fumigate the house. 
And call Penelope here with all her women — 
tell all the maids to come back in at once." 
"Well said, my boy, " his old nurse replied, 
"right to the point. But wait, 
let me fetch you a shirt and cloak to wrap you. 
No more dawdling round the palace, nothing but rags 
to cover those broad shoulders — it's a scandal!" 
"Fire first," the good soldier answered. 
"Light me a fire to purify this house. " 
The devoted nurse snapped to his command, 
brought her master fire and brimstone. Odysseus 
purged his palace, halls and court, with cleansing fumes. 
Then back through the royal house the old nurse went 
to tell the women the news and bring them in at once. 
They came crowding out of their quarters, torch in hand, 
flung their arms around Odysseus, hugged him, home at last, 
and kissed his head and shoulders, seized his hands, and he, 
overcome by a lovely longing, broke down and wept ... 
deep in his heart he knew them one and all. 
The Great 
Rooted Bed 
Up to the rooms the old nurse clambered, chuckling all the way, 
to tell the queen her husband was here now, home at last. 
Her knees bustling, feet shuffling over each other, 
till hovering at her mistress' head she spoke: 
"Penelope — child — wake up and see for yourself, 
with your own eyes, all you dreamed of, all your days! 
He's here — Odysseus — he's come home, at long last! 
He's killed the suitors, swaggering young brutes 
who plagued his house, wolfed his cattle down, 
rode roughshod over his son!" 
"Dear old nurse," wary Penelope replied, 
"the gods have made you mad. They have that power, 
putting lunacy into the clearest head around 
or setting a half-wit on the path to sense. 
They've unhinged you, and you were once so sane. 
Why do you mock me? — haven't I wept enough? — 
telhng such wild stories, interrupting my sleep, 
sweet sleep that held me, sealed my eyes just now. 
Not once have 1 slept so soundly since the day 
Odysseus sailed away to see that cursed city ... 
Destroy, 1 call it — 1 hate to say its name! 
Now down you go. Back to your own quarters. 
If any other woman of mine had come to me, 
rousing me out of sleep with such a tale, 
I'd have her bundled back to her room in pain. 
It's only your old gray head that spares you that! ' 
"Never" — the fond old nurse kept pressing on — 
"dear child, I'd never mock you! No, it's all true, 
he's here — Odysseus — he's come home, just as 1 tell you! 
He'sXhe stranger they all manhandled in the hall. 
Telemachus knew he was here, for days and days, 
but he knew enough to hide his father's plans 
so could pay those vipers back in kind!" 
Penelope's heart burst in joy , she leapt from bed, 
her eyes streaming tears, she hugged the old nurse 
and cried out with an eager, winging word, 
"Please, dear one, give me the whole story. 
If he's really home again, just as you tell me, 
how did he get those shameless suitors in his clutches? — 
single-handed, braving an army always camped inside." 
"1 have no idea," the devoted nurse replied. 
"1 didn't see it, 1 didn't ask— all 1 heard 
was the choking groans of men cut down in blood. 
We crouched in terror — a dark nook of our quarters — 
all of us locked tight behind those snug doors 
till your boy Telemachus came and called me out — 
his father rushed him there to do just that. Then 
1 found Odysseus in the thick of slaughtered corpses; 
there he stood and all around him, over the beaten floor, 
the bodies sprawled in heaps, lying one on another ... 
How it would have thrilled your heart to see him — 
splattered with bloody filth, a lion with his kill! 
And now they're all stacked at the courtyard gates — 
he's lit a roaring fire, 
he's purifying the house with cleansing fumes 
and he's sent me here to bring you back to him. 
Follow me down! So now, after all the years of grief, 
you two can embark, loving hearts, along the road to joy. 
Look, your dreams, put off so long, come true at last — 
he's back alive, home at his hearth, and found you, 
found his son still here. And all those suitors 
who did him wrong, he's paid them back, he has, 
right in his own house!" 
"Hush, dear woman," 
guarded Penelope cautioned her at once. 
"Don't laugh, don't cry in triumph — not yet. 
You know how welcome the sight of him would be 
to all in the house, and to me most of all 
and the son we bore together. 
But the story can't be true, not as you tell it, 
no, it must be a god who's killed our brazen friends — 
up in arms at their outrage, heartbreaking crimes. 
They'd no regard for any man on earth — 
good or bad — ^who chanced to come their way. So, 
thanks to their reckless work they die their deaths. 
Odysseus? Far from Achaea now, he's lost all hope 
of coming home ... he's lost and gone himself." 
"Child," the devoted old nurse protested, 
"what nonsense you let slip through your teeth. 
Here's your husband, warming his hands at his own hearth, 
here — and you, you say he'll never come home again, 
always the soul of trust! All right, this too — 
I'll give you a sign, a proof that's plain as day. 
That scar, made years ago by a boar's white tusk — 
1 spotted the scar myself, when 1 washed his feet. 
and I tried to tell you, ah, but he, the crafty rascal, 
clamped his hand on my mouth — 1 couldn't say a word. 
Follow me down now. I'll stake my life on it: 
if 1 am lying to you — 
kill me with a thousand knives of pain!" 
"Dear old nurse, " composed Penelope responded, 
"deep as you are, my friend, you'll find it hard 
to plumb the plans of the everlasting gods. 
All the same, let 's go and join my son 
so 1 can see the suitors lying dead 
and see ... the one who killed them." 
With that thought 
Penelope started down from her lofty room, her heart 
in turmoil, torn ... should she keep her distance, 
probe her husband? Or rush up to the man at once 
and kiss his head and cling to both his hands? 
As soon as she stepped across the stone threshold, 
slipping in, she took a seat at the closest wall 
and radiant in the firelight, faced Odysseus now. 
There he sat, leaning against the great central column, 
eyes fixed on the ground, waiting, poised for whatever words 
his hardy wife might say when she caught sight of him. 
A long while she sat in silence ... numbing wonder 
filled her heart as her eyes explored his face. 
One moment he seemed ... Odysseus, to the life — 
the next, no, he was not the man she knew, 
a huddled mass of rags was all she saw. 
"Oh mother," Telemachus reproached her, 
"cruel mother, you with your hard heart! 
Why do you spurn my father so — ^why don't you 
sit beside him, engage him, ask him questions? 
What other wife could have a spirit so unbending? 
Holding back from her husband, home at last for her 
after bearing twenty years of brutal struggle — 
your heart was always harder than a rock!" 
"My child," 
Penelope, well-aware, explained, "I'm stunned with wonder, 
powerless. Cannot speak to him, ask him questions, 
look him in the eyes ... But if he is truly 
Odysseus, home at last, make no mistake: 
we two will know each other, even better — 
we two have secret signs, 
known to us both but hidden from the world. " 
Odysseus, long-enduring, broke into a smile 
and turned to his son with pointed, winging words: 
"Leave your mother here in the hall to test me 
as she will. She soon will know me better. 
Now because 1 am filthy, wear such grimy rags, 
she spurns me — your mother still can't bring herself 
to believe 1 am her husband. 
But you and 1, 
put heads together. What's our best defense? 
When someone kills a lone man in the realm 
who leaves behind him no great band of avengers, 
still the killer flees, goodbye to kin and country. 
But tvie brought down the best of the island's princes, 
the pillars of Ithaca. Weigh it well, 1 urge you." 
"Look to it all yourself now, father," his son 
deferred at once. "You are the best on earth, 
they say, when it comes to mapping tactics. 
No one, no mortal man, can touch you there. 
But we're behind you, hearts intent on battle, 
nor do 1 think you'll find us short on courage, 
long as our strength will last. " 
"Then here's our plan," 
the master of tactics said. "1 think it's best. 
First go and wash, and pull fresh tunics on, 
and tell the maids in the hall to dress well too. 
And let the inspired bard take up his ringing lyre 
and lead off for us all a dance so full of heart 
that whoever hears the strains outside the gates — 
a passerby on the road, a neighbor round about — 
will think it's a wedding-feast that's under way. 
No news of the suitors' death must spread through town 
till we have slipped away to our own estates, 
our orchard green with trees. There we'll see 
what winning strategy Zeus will hand us then. ' 
They hung on his words and moved to orders smartly. 
First they washed and pulled fresh tunics on, 
the women arrayed themselves — the inspired bard 
struck up his resounding lyre and stirred in all 
a desire for dance and song, the lovely lilting beat, 
till the great house echoed round to the measured tread 
of dancing men in motion, women sashed and lithe. 
And whoever heard the strains outside would say, 
"A miracle — someone's married the queen at last! ' 
"One of her hundred suitors. ' 
"That callous woman, 
too faithless to keep her lord and master's house 
to the bitter end — " 
"Till he came sailing home." 
So they'd say, blind to what had happened: 
the great-hearted Odysseus was home again at last. 
The maid Eurynome bathed him, rubbed him down with oil 
and drew around him a royal cape and choice tunic too. 
And Athena crowned the man with beauty, head to foot, 
made him taller to all eyes, his build more massive, 
yes, and down from his brow the great goddess 
ran his curls like thick hyacinth clusters 
full of blooms. As a master craftsman washes 
gold over beaten silver — a man the god of fire 
and Queen Athena trained in every fine technique — 
and finishes of his latest effort, handsome work ... 
so she lavished splendor over his head and shoulders now. 
He stepped from his bath, glistening like a god, 
and back he went to the seat that he had left 
and facing his wife, declared. 
"Strange woman! So hard — the gods of Olympus 
made you harder than any other woman in the world! 
What other wife could have a spirit so unbending? 
Holding back from her husband, home at last for her 
after bearing twenty years of brutal struggle. 
Come, nurse, make me a bed, I'll sleep alone. 
She has a heart of iron in her breast." 
"Strange /72a/7/' 
wary Penelope said. "I'm not so proud, so scornful, 
nor am 1 overwhelmed by your quick change ... 
You look — how well 1 know — the way he looked, 
setting sail from Ithaca years ago 
aboard the long-oared ship. 
Come, Eurycleia, 
move the sturdy bedstead out of our bridal chamber — 
that room the master built with his own hands. 
Take it out now, sturdy bed that it is, 
and spread it deep with fleece, 
blankets and lustrous throws to keep him warm." 
Putting her husband to the proof — but Odysseus 
blazed up in fury, lashing out at his loyal wife: 
"Woman — your words, they cut me to the core! 
Who could move my bed? Impossible task, 
even for some skilled craftsman — unless a god 
came down in person, quick to lend a hand, 
lifted it out with ease and moved it elsewhere. 
Not a man on earth, not even at peak strength, 
would find it easy to prise it up and shift it, no, 
a great sign, a hallmark lies in its construction. 
1 know, 1 built it myself — no one else ... 
There was a branching olive-tree inside our court, 
grown to its full prime, the bole like a column, thickset. 
Around it 1 built my bedroom, finished off the walls 
with good tight stonework, roofed it over soundly 
and added doors, hung well and snugly wedged. 
Then 1 lopped the leafy crown of the olive, 
clean-cutting the stump bare from roots up. 
planing it round with a bronze smoothing-adze — 
I had the skill — I shaped it plumb to the line to make 
my bedpost, bored the holes it needed with an auger. 
Working from there 1 built my bed, start to finish, 
1 gave it ivory inlays, gold and silver fittings, 
wove the straps across it, oxhide gleaming red. 
There's our secret sign, 1 tell you, our life story! 
Does the bed, my lady, still stand planted firm? — 
1 don't know — or has someone chopped away 
that olive-trunk and hauled our bedstead off? " 
Living proof — 
Penelope felt her knees go slack, her heart surrender, 
recognizing the strong clear signs Odysseus offered. 
She dissolved in tears, rushed to Odysseus, flung her arms 
around his neck and kissed his head and cried out, 
" Odysseus— &OYi\. flare up at me now, not you, 
always the most understanding man alive! 
The gods, it was the gods who sent us sorrow — 
they grudged us both a life in each other's arms 
from the heady zest of youth to the stoop of old age. 
But don't fault me, angry with me now because 1 failed, 
at the first glimpse, to greet you, hold you, so ... 
In my heart of hearts 1 always cringed with fear 
some fraud might come, beguile me with his talk; 
the world is full of the sort, 
cunning ones who plot their own dark ends. 
Remember Helen of Argos, Zeus's daughter — 
would shehsMe sported so in a stranger's bed 
if she had dreamed that Achaea's sons were doomed 
to fight and die to bring her home again? 
Some god spurred her to do her shameless work. 
Not till then did her mind conceive that madness, 
blinding madness that caused her anguish, ours as well. 
But now, since you have revealed such overwhelming proof — 
the secret sign of our bed, which no one's ever seen 
but you and 1 and a single handmaid, Actoris, 
the servant my father gave me when 1 came. 
who kept the doors of our room you built so well ... 
you've conquered my heart, my hard heart, at last!" 
The more she spoke, the more a deep desire for tears 
welled up inside his breast — he wept as he held the wife 
he loved, the soul of loyalty, in his arms at last. 
Joy, warm as the joy that shipwrecked sailors feel 
when they catch sight of land — Poseidon has struck 
their well-rigged ship on the open sea with gale winds 
and crushing walls of waves, and only a few escape, swimming, 
struggling out of the frothing surf to reach the shore, 
their bodies crusted with salt but buoyed up with joy 
as they plant their feet on solid ground again, 
spared a deadly fate. So joyous now to her 
the sight of her husband, vivid in her gaze, 
that her white arms, embracing his neck 
would never for a moment let him go ... 
Dawn with her rose-red fingers might have shone 
upon their tears, if with her glinting eyes 
Athena had not thought of one more thing. 
She held back the night, and night lingered long 
at the western edge of the earth, while in the east 
she reined in Dawn of the golden throne at Ocean's banks, 
commanding her not to yoke the windswift team that brings men light. 
Blaze and Aurora, the young colts that race the Morning on. 
Yet now Odysseus, seasoned veteran, said to his wife, 
"Dear woman ... we have still not reached the end 
of all our trials. One more labor lies in store — 
boundless, laden with danger, great and long, 
and 1 must brave it out from start to finish. 
So the ghost of Tiresias prophesied to me, 
the day that 1 went down to the House of Death 
to learn our best route home, my comrades' and my own. 
But come, let's go to bed, dear woman — at long last 
delight in sleep, delight in each other, come!" 
"If it's bed you want, " reserved Penelope replied, 
"it's bed you'll have, whenever the spirit moves, 
now that the gods have brought you home again 
to native land, your grand and gracious house. 
But since you've alluded to it, 
since a god has put it in your mind, 
please, tell me about this trial still to come. 
I'm bound to learn of it later, 1 am sure — 
what's the harm if 1 hear of it tonight?" 
"Still so strange," 
Odysseus, the old master of stories, answered. 
"Why again, why force me to tell you all? 
Well, tell 1 shall. I'll hide nothing now. 
But little joy it will bring you, I'm afraid, 
as little joy for me. 
The prophet said 
that 1 must rove through towns on towns of men, 
that 1 must carry a well-planed oar until 
1 come to a people who know nothing of the sea, 
whose food is never seasoned with salt, strangers all 
to ships with their crimson prows and long slim oars, 
wings that make ships fly. And here is my sign, 
he told me, clear, so clear I cannot miss it, 
and 1 will share it with you now ... 
When another traveler falls in with me and calls 
that weight across my shoulder a fan to winnow grain, 
then, he told me, 1 must plant my oar in the earth 
and sacrifice fine beasts to the lord god of the sea, 
Poseidon — a ram, a bull and a ramping wild boar — 
then journey home and render noble offerings up 
to the deathless gods who rule the vaulting skies, 
to all the gods in order. 
And at last my own death will steal upon me ... 
a gentle, painless death, far from the sea it comes 
to take me down, borne down with the years in ripe old age 
with all my people here in blessed peace around me. 
All this, the prophet said, will come to pass." 
"And so, " Penelope said, in her great wisdom, 
"if the gods will really grant a happier old age, 
there's hope that we'll escape our trials at last." 
So husband and wife confided in each other, 
while nurse and Eurynome, under the flaring brands, 
were making up the bed with coverings deep and soft. 
And working briskly, soon as they'd made it snug, 
back to her room the old nurse went to sleep 
as Eurynome, their attendant, torch in hand, 
lighted the royal couple's way to bed and, 
leading them to their chamber, slipped away. 
Rejoicing in each other, they returned to their bed, 
the old familiar place they loved so well. 
Now Telemachus, the cowherd and the swineherd 
rested their dancing feet and had the women do the same, 
and across the shadowed hall the men lay down to sleep. 
But the royal couple, once they'd reveled in all 
the longed-for joys of love, reveled in each other's stories, 
the radiant woman telling of all she'd borne at home, 
watching them there, the infernal crowd of suitors 
slaughtering herds of cattle and good fat sheep — 
while keen to win her hand — 
draining the broached vats dry of vintage wine. 
And great Odysseus told his wife of all the pains 
he had dealt out to other men and all the hardships 
he'd endured himself — his story first to last — 
and she listened on, enchanted ... 
Sleep never sealed her eyes till all was told. 
He launched in with how he fought the Cicones down, 
then how he came to the Lotus-eaters' lush green land. 
Then all the crimes of the Cyclops and how he paid him back 
for the gallant men the monster ate without a qualm — 
then how he visited Aeolus, who gave him a hero's welcome 
then he sent him off, but the homeward run was not his fate, 
not yet — some sudden squalls snatched him away once more 
and drove him over the swarming sea, groaning in despair. 
Then how he moored at Telepylus, where Laestrygonians 
wrecked his fleet and killed his men-at-arms. 
He told her of Circe's cunning magic wiles 
and how he voyaged down in his long benched ship 
to the moldering House of Death, to consult Tiresias, 
ghostly seer of Thebes, and he saw old comrades there 
and he saw his mother, who bore and reared him as a child. 
He told how he caught the Sirens' voices throbbing in the wind 
and how he had scudded past the Clashing Rocks, past grim Charybdis, 
past Scylla — whom no rover had ever coasted by, home free — 
and how his shipmates slaughtered the cattle of the Sun 
and Zeus the king of thunder split his racing ship 
with a reeking bolt and killed his hardy comrades, 
all his fighting men at a stroke, but he alone 
escaped their death at sea. He told how he reached 
Ogygia's shores and the nymph Calypso held him back, 
deep in her arching caverns, craving him for a husband — 
cherished him, vowed to make him immortal, ageless, all his days, 
yes, but she never won the heart inside him, never ... 
then how he reached the Phaeacians — heavy sailing there — 
who with all their hearts had prized him like a god 
and sent him off in a ship to his own beloved land, 
giving him bronze and hoards of gold and robes ... 
and that was the last he told her, just as sleep 
overcame him ... sleep loosing his limbs, 
slipping the toils of anguish from his mind. 
Athena, her eyes afire, had fresh plans. 
Once she thought he'd had his heart's content 
of love and sleep at his wife's side, straightaway 
she roused young Dawn from Ocean's banks to her golden throne 
to bring men light and roused Odysseus too, who rose 
from his soft bed and advised his wife in parting, 
"Dear woman, we both have had our fill of trials. 
You in our house, weeping over my journey home, 
fraught with storms and torment, true, and 1, 
pinned down in pain by Zeus and other gods. 
for all my desire, blocked from reaching home. 
But now that we've arrived at our bed together — 
the reunion that we yearned for all those years — 
look after the things still left me in our house. 
But as for the flocks those strutting suitors plundered, 
much I'll recoup myself, making many raids; 
the rest our fellow-lthacans will supply 
till all my folds are full of sheep again. 
But now 1 must be off to the upland farm, 
our orchard green with trees, to see my father, 
good old man weighed down with so much grief for me. 
And you, dear woman, sensible as you are, 
1 would advise you, still ... 
quick as the rising sun the news will spread 
of the suitors that 1 killed inside the house. 
So climb to your lofty chamber with your women. 
Sit tight there. See no one. Question no one." 
He strapped his burnished armor round his shoulders, 
roused Telemachus, the cowherd and the swineherd, 
and told them to take up weapons honed for battle. 
They snapped to commands, harnessed up in bronze, 
opened the doors and strode out, Odysseus in the lead. 
By now the daylight covered the land, but Pallas, 
shrouding them all in darkness, 
quickly led the four men out of town. 
Peace 
Now Cyllenian Hermes called away the suitors' ghosts, 
holding firm in his hand the wand of fine pure gold 
that enchants the eyes of men whenever Hermes wants 
or wakes us up from sleep. 
With a wave of this he stirred and led them on 
and the ghosts trailed after with high thin cries 
as bats cry in the depths of a dark haunted cavern, 
shrilling, flittering, wild when one drops from the chain — 
slipped from the rock face, while the rest cling tight ... 
So with their high thin cries the ghosts flocked now 
and Hermes the Healer led them on, and down the dank 
moldering paths and past the Ocean's streams they went 
and past the White Rock and the Sun's Western Gates and past 
the Land of Dreams, and they soon reached the fields of asphodel 
where the dead, the burnt-out wraiths of mortals, make their home. 
There they found the ghosts of Peleus' son Achilles, 
Patroclus, fearless Antilochus — and Great Ajax too, 
the first in stature, first in build and bearing 
of all the Argives after Peleus' matchless son. 
They had grouped around Achilles' ghost, and now 
the shade of Atreus' son Agamemnon marched toward them — 
fraught with grief and flanked by all his comrades, 
troops of his men-at-arms who died beside him, 
who met their fate in lord Aegisthus' halls. 
Achilles' ghost was first to greet him: "Agamemnon, 
you were the one, we thought, of all our fighting princes 
Zeus who loves the lightning favored most, all your days, 
because you commanded such a powerful host of men 
on the fields of Troy where we Achaeans suffered. 
But you were doomed to encounter fate so early, 
you too, yet no one born escapes its deadly force. 
If only you had died your death in the full flush 
of the glory you had mastered — died on Trojan soil! 
Then all united Achaea would have raised your tomb 
and you'd have won your son great fame for years to come. 
Not so. You were fated to die a wretched death." 
And the ghost of Atrides Agamemnon answered, 
"Son of Peleus, great godlike Achilles! Happy man, 
you died on the fields of Troy, a world away from home, 
and the best of Trojan and Argive champions died around you, 
fighting for your corpse. And you ... there you lay 
in the whirling dust, overpowered in all your power 
and wiped from memory all your horseman's skills. 
That whole day we fought, we'd never have stopped 
if Zeus had not stopped f/5with sudden gales. 
Then we bore you out of the fighting, onto the ships, 
we laid you down on a litter, cleansed your handsome flesh 
with warm water and soothing oils, and round your body 
troops of Danaans wept hot tears and cut their locks. 
Hearing the news, your mother, Thetis, rose from the sea, 
immortal sea-nymphs in her wake, and a strange unearthly cry 
came throbbing over the ocean. Terror gripped Achaea's armies, 
they would have leapt in panic, boarded the long hollow ships 
if one man, deep in his age-old wisdom, had not checked them: 
Nestor — from the first his counsel always seemed the best, 
and now, concerned for the ranks, he rose and shouted, 
'Hold fast, Argives! Sons of Achaea, don't run now! 
This is Achilles' mother rising from the sea 
with all her immortal sea-nymphs — 
she longs to join her son who died in battle!' 
That stopped our panicked forces in their tracks 
as the Old Man of the Sea's daughters gathered round you — 
wailing, heartsick — dressed you in ambrosial, deathless robes 
and the Muses, nine in all, voice-to-voice in choirs, 
their vibrant music rising, raised your dirge. 
Not one soldier would you have seen dry-eyed, 
the Muses' song so pierced us to the heart. 
For seventeen days unbroken, days and nights 
we mourned you — immortal gods and mortal men. 
At the eighteenth dawn we gave you to the flames 
and slaughtered around your body droves of fat sheep 
and shambling longhorn cattle, and you were burned 
in the garments of the gods and laved with soothing oils 
and honey running sweet, and a long cortege of Argive heroes 
paraded in review, in battle armor round your blazing pyre, 
men in chariots, men on foot — a resounding roar went up. 
And once the god of fire had burned your corpse to ash, 
at first light we gathered your white bones, Achilles, 
cured them in strong neat wine and seasoned oils. 
Your mother gave us a gold two-handled urn, 
a gift from Dionysus, she said, 
a masterwork of the famous Smith, the god of fire. 
Your white bones rest in that, my brilliant Achilles, 
mixed with the bones of dead Patroclus, Menoetius' son, 
apart from those of Antilochus, whom you treasured 
more than all other comrades once Patroclus died. 
Over your bones we reared a grand, noble tomb — 
devoted veterans all, Achaea's combat forces — 
high on its jutting headland over the Hellespont 's 
broad reach, a landmark glimpsed from far out at sea 
by men of our own day and men of days to come. 
And then 
your mother, begging the gods for priceless trophies, 
set them out in the ring for all our champions. 
You in your day have witnessed funeral games 
for many heroes, games to honor the death of kings, 
when young men cinch their belts, tense to win some prize — 
but if you'd laid eyes on theseiX. would have thrilled your heart, 
magnificent trophies the goddess, glistening-footed Thetis, 
held out in your honor. You were dear to the gods, 
so even in death your name will never die ... 
Great glory is yours, Achilles, 
for all time, in the eyes of all mankind! 
But 1? 
What joy for /Tie when the coil of war had wound down? 
For 772^ return Zeus hatched a pitiful death 
at the hands of Aegisthus — and my accursed wife." 
As they exchanged the stories of their fates, 
Hermes the guide and giant-killer drew up close to both, 
leading down the ghosts of the suitors King Odysseus killed. 
Struck by the sight, the two went up to them right away 
and the ghost of Atreus' son Agamemnon recognized 
the noted prince Amphimedon, Melaneus' dear son 
who received him once in Ithaca, at his home, 
and Atrides' ghost called out to his old friend now, 
"Amphimedon, what disaster brings you down to the dark world? 
All of you, good picked men, and all in your prime — 
no captain out to recruit the best in any city 
could have chosen better. What laid you low? 
Wrecked in the ships when lord Poseidon roused 
some punishing blast of gales and heavy breakers? 
Or did ranks of enemies mow you down on land 
as you tried to raid and cut off herds and flocks 
or fought to win their city, take their women? 
Answer me, tell me. 1 was once your guest. 
Don't you recall the day 1 came to visit 
your house in Ithaca — King Menelaus came too — 
to urge Odysseus to sail with us in the ships 
on our campaign to Troy? And the long slow voyage, 
crossing wastes of ocean, cost us one whole month. 
That's how hard it was to bring him round, 
Odysseus, raider of cities." 
"Famous Atrides! " 
Amphimedon's ghost called back. "Lord of men, Agamemnon, 
1 remember it all, your majesty, as you say, 
and 1 will tell you, start to finish now, 
the story of our death, 
the brutal end contrived to take us off. 
We were courting the wife of Odysseus, gone so long. 
She neither spurned nor embraced a marriage she despised, 
no, she simply planned our death, our black doom! 
7]&/5was her latest masterpiece of guile: 
she set up a great loom in the royal halls 
and she began to weave, and the weaving finespun, 
the yarns endless, and she would lead us on: 'Young men, 
my suitors, now that King Odysseus is no more, 
go slowly, keen as you are to marry me, until 
1 can finish off this web ... 
so my weaving won't all fray and come to nothing. 
This is a shroud for old lord Laertes, for that day 
when the deadly fate that lays us out at last will take him down. 
1 dread the shame my countrywomen would heap upon me, 
yes, if a man of such wealth should lie in state 
without a shroud for cover.' 
Her very words, 
and despite our pride and passion we believed her. 
So by day she'd weave at her great and growing web — 
by night, by the light of torches set beside her, 
she would unravel all she'd done. Three whole years 
she deceived us blind, seduced us with this scheme ... 
Then, when the wheeling seasons brought the fourth year on 
and the months waned and the long days came round once more. 
one of her women, in on the queen's secret, told the truth 
and we caught her in the act — unweaving her gorgeous web. 
So she finished it off. Against her will. We forced her. 
But just as she bound off that great shroud and washed it, 
spread it out — glistening like the sunlight or the moon — 
just then some wicked spirit brought Odysseus back, 
from god knows where, to the edge of his estate 
where the swineherd kept his pigs. And back too, 
to the same place, came Odysseus' own dear son, 
scudding home in his black ship from sandy Pylos. 
The pair of them schemed our doom, our deathtrap, 
then lit out for town — 
Telemachus first in fact, Odysseus followed, 
later, led by the swineherd, and clad in tatters, 
looking for all the world like an old and broken beggar 
hunched on a stick, his body wrapped in shameful rags. 
Disguised so none of us, not even the older ones, 
could spot that tramp for the man he really was, 
bursting in on us there, out of the blue. No, 
we attacked him, blows and insults flying fast, 
and he took it all for a time, in his own house, 
all the taunts and blows — he had a heart of iron. 
But once the will of thundering Zeus had roused his blood, 
he and Telemachus bore the burnished weapons off 
and stowed them deep in a storeroom, shot the bolts 
and he — the soul of cunning — ^told his wife to set 
the great bow and the gleaming iron axes out 
before the suitors — all of us doomed now — 
to test our skill and bring our slaughter on ... 
Not one of us had the strength to string that powerful weapon, 
all of us fell far short of what it took. But then, 
when the bow was coming round to Odysseus' hands, 
we raised a hue and cry — he must not have it, 
no matter how he begged! Only Telemachus 
urged him to take it up, and once he got it 
in his clutches, long-suffering great Odysseus 
strung his bow with ease and shot through all the axes, 
then, vaulting onto the threshold, stood there poised, and pouring 
his flashing arrows out before him, glaring for the kill, 
he cut Antinous down, then shot his painful arrows 
into the rest of us, aiming straight and true, 
and down we went, corpse on corpse in droves. 
Clearly a god was driving him and all his henchmen, 
routing us headlong in their fury down the hall, 
wheeling into the slaughter, slashing left and right 
and grisly screams broke from skulls cracked open — 
the whole floor awash with blood. 
So we died, 
Agamemnon ... our bodies lie untended even now, 
strewn in Odysseus' palace. They know nothing yet, 
the kin in our houses who might wash our wounds 
of clotted gore and lay us out and mourn us. 
These are the solemn honors owed the dead." 
"Happy Odysseus!" 
Agamemnon's ghost cried out. "Son of old Laertes — 
mastermind — ^what a fine, faithful wife you won! 
What good sense resided in your Penelope — 
how well Icarius' daughter remembered you, 
Odysseus, the man she married once! 
The fame of her great virtue will never die. 
The immortal gods will lift a song for all mankind, 
a glorious song in praise of self-possessed Penelope. 
A far cry from the daughter of Tyndareus, Clytemnestra — 
what outrage she committed, killing the man 5Ae married once! — 
yes, and the song men sing of her will ring with loathing. 
She brands with a foul name the breed of womankind, 
even the honest ones to come!" 
So they traded stories, 
the two ghosts standing there in the House of Death, 
far in the hidden depths below the earth. 
Odysseus and his men had stridden down from town 
and quickly reached Laertes' large, well-tended farm 
that the old king himself had wrested from the wilds, 
years ago, laboring long and hard. His lodge was here 
and around it stretched a row of sheds where fieldhands. 
bondsmen who did his bidding, sat and ate and slept. 
With an old Sicilian woman, too, much in charge, 
who faithfully looked after her aged master 
out on his good estate remote from town. 
Odysseus told his servants and his son, 
"Into the timbered lodge now, go, quickly, 
kill us the fattest porker, fix our meal. 
And 1 will put my father to the test, 
see if the old man knows me now, on sight, 
or fails to, after twenty years apart." 
With that he passed his armor to his men 
and in they went at once, his son as well. Odysseus 
wandered off, approaching the thriving vineyard, searching, 
picking his way down to the great orchard, searching, 
but found neither Dolius nor his sons nor any hand. 
They'd just gone off, old Dolius in the lead, 
to gather stones for a dry retaining wall 
to shore the vineyard up. But he did find 
his father, alone, on that well-worked plot, 
spading round a sapling — clad in filthy rags, 
in a patched, unseemly shirt, and round his shins 
he had some oxhide leggings strapped, patched too, 
to keep from getting scraped, and gloves on his hands 
to fight against the thorns, and on his head 
he wore a goatskin skullcap 
to cultivate his misery that much more ... 
Long-enduring Odysseus, catching sight of him now — 
a man worn down with years, his heart racked with sorrow — 
halted under a branching pear-tree, paused and wept. 
Debating, head and heart, what should he do now? 
Kiss and embrace his father, pour out the long tale — 
how he had made the journey home to native land — 
or probe him first and test him every way? 
Torn, mulling it over, this seemed better: 
test the old man first, 
reproach him with words that cut him to the core. 
Convinced, Odysseus went right up to his father. 
Laertes was digging round the sapling, head bent low 
as his famous offspring hovered over him and began, 
"You want no skill, old man, at tending a garden. 
All's well-kept here; not one thing in the plot, 
no plant, no fig, no pear, no olive, no vine, 
not a vegetable, lacks your tender, loving care. 
But 1 must say — and don't be offended now — 
your plants are doing better than yourself. 
Enough to be stooped with age 
but look how squalid you are, those shabby rags. 
Surely it's not for sloth your master lets you go to seed. 
There's nothing of slave about your build or bearing. 
1 have eyes: you look like a king to me. The sort 
entitled to bathe, sup well, then sleep in a soft bed. 
That's the right and pride of you old-timers. 
Come now, tell me — in no uncertain terms — 
whose slave are you? whose orchard are you tending? 
And tell me this — 1 must be absolutely sure — 
this place I've reached, is it truly Ithaca? 
Just as that fellow told me, just now ... 
1 fell in with him on the road here. Clumsy, 
none too friendly, couldn't trouble himself 
to hear me out or give me a decent answer 
when 1 asked about a long-lost friend of mine, 
whether he's still alive, somewhere in Ithaca, 
or dead and gone already, lost in the House of Death. 
Do you want to hear his story? Listen. Catch my drift. 
1 once played host to a man in my own country; 
he'd come to my door, the most welcome guest 
from foreign parts 1 ever entertained. 
He claimed he came of good Ithacan stock, 
said his father was Arcesius' son, Laertes. 
So 1 took the new arrival under my own roof, 
1 gave him a hero's welcome, treated him in style — 
stores in our palace made for princely entertainment. 
And 1 gave my friend some gifts to fit his station, 
handed him seven bars of well-wrought gold, 
a mixing-bowl of solid silver, etched with flowers. 
a dozen cloaks, unlined and light, a dozen rugs 
and as many full-cut capes and shirts as well, 
and to top it off, four women, perfect beauties 
skilled in crafts — he could pick them out himself." 
"Stranger," his father answered, weeping softly, 
"the land you've reached is the very one you're after, 
true, but it's in the grip of reckless, lawless men. 
And as for the gifts you showered on your guest, 
you gave them all for nothing. 
But if you'd found him alive, here in Ithaca, 
he would have replied in kind, with gift for gift, 
and entertained you warmly before he sent you off. 
That's the old custom, when one has led the way. 
But tell me, please — in no uncertain terms — 
how many years ago did you host the man, 
that unfortunate guest of yours, my son ... 
there was a son, or was he all a dream? 
That most unlucky man, whom now, 1 fear, 
far from his own soil and those he loves, 
the fish have swallowed down on the high seas 
or birds and beasts on land have made their meal. 
Nor could the ones who bore him — mother, father — 
wrap his corpse in a shroud and mourn him deeply. 
Nor could his warm, generous wife, so self-possessed, 
Penelope, ever keen for her husband on his deathbed, 
the fit and proper way, or close his eyes at last. 
These are the solemn honors owed the dead. 
But tell me your own story — that I'd like to know: 
Who are you? where are you from? your city? your parents? 
Where does the ship lie moored that brought you here, 
your hardy shipmates too? Or did you arrive 
as a passenger aboard some stranger's craft 
and men who put you ashore have pulled away?" 
"The whole tale," 
his crafty son replied, "I'll tell you start to finish. 
1 come from Roamer-Town, my home's a famous place, 
my father's Unsparing, son of old King Pain, 
and my name's Man of Strife ... 
I sailed from Sicily, aye, but some ill wind 
blew me here, off course — much against my will — 
and my ship lies moored off farmlands far from town. 
As for Odysseus, well, five years have passed 
since he left my house and put my land behind him, 
luckless man! But the birds were good as he launched out, 
all on the right, and 1 rejoiced as 1 sent him off 
and he rejoiced in sailing. We had high hopes 
we'd meet again as guests, as old friends, 
and trade some shining gifts." 
At those words 
a black cloud of grief came shrouding over Laertes. 
Both hands clawing the ground for dirt and grime, 
he poured it over his grizzled head, sobbing, in spasms. 
Odysseus' heart shuddered, a sudden twinge went shooting up 
through his nostrils, watching his dear father struggle ... 
He sprang toward him, kissed him, hugged him, crying, 
"Father — 1 am your son — myself, the man you're seeking, 
home after twenty years, on native ground at last! 
Hold back your tears, your grief. 
Let me tell you the news, but we must hurry — 
I've cut the suitors down in our own house, 
I've paid them back their outrage, vicious crimes!" 
"Odysseus 
Laertes, catching his breath, found words to answer. 
"You — you're truly my son, Odysseus, home at last? 
Give me a sign, some proof — 1 must be sure." 
"This scar first," 
quick to the mark, his son said, "look at this — 
the wound 1 took from the boar's white tusk 
on Mount Parnassus. There you'd sent me, you 
and mother, to see her fond old father, Autolycus, 
and collect the gifts he vowed to give me, once, 
when he came to see us here. 
Or these, these trees — 
let me tell you the trees you gave me years ago, 
here on this well-worked plot ... 
I begged you for everything I saw, a little boy 
trailing you through the orchard, picking our way 
among these trees, and you named them one by one. 
You gave me thirteen pear, ten apple trees 
and forty figs — and promised to give me, look, 
fifty vinerows, bearing hard on each other's heels, 
clusters of grapes year-round at every grade of ripeness, 
mellowed as Zeus's seasons weigh them down. " 
Living proof — 
and Laertes' knees went slack, his heart surrendered, 
recognizing the strong clear signs Odysseus offered. 
He threw his arms around his own dear son, fainting 
as hardy great Odysseus hugged him to his heart 
until he regained his breath, came back to life 
and cried out, "Father Zeus — 
you gods of Olympus, you still rule on high 
if those suitors have truly paid in blood 
for all their reckless outrage! Oh, but now 
my heart quakes with fear that all the Ithacans 
will come down on us in a pack, at any time, 
and rush the alarm through every island town!" 
"There's nothing to fear," his canny son replied, 
"put it from your mind. Let's make for your lodge 
beside the orchard here. 1 sent Telemachus on ahead, 
the cowherd, swineherd too, to fix a hasty meal." 
So the two went home, confiding all the way, 
and arriving at the ample, timbered lodge, 
they found Telemachus with the two herdsmen 
carving sides of meat and mixing ruddy wine. 
Before they ate, the Sicilian serving-woman 
bathed her master, Laertes — his spirits high 
in his own room — and rubbed him down with oil 
and round his shoulders drew a fresh new cloak. 
And Athena stood beside him, fleshing out the limbs 
of the old commander, made him taller to all eyes, 
his build more massive, stepping from his bath. 
so his own son gazed at him, wonderstruck — 
face-to-face he seemed a deathless god ... 
"Father" — Odysseus' words had wings — "surely 
one of the everlasting gods has made you 
taller, stronger, shining in my eyes!" 
Facing his son, the wise old man returned, 
"If only — Father Zeus, Athena and lord Apollo — 
1 were the man 1 was, king of the Cephallenians 
when 1 sacked the city of Nericus, sturdy fortress 
out on its jutting cape! If I'd been young in arms 
last night in our house with harness on my back, 
standing beside you, fighting off the suitors, 
how many 1 would have cut the knees from under — 
the heart inside you would have leapt for joy !" 
So father and son confirmed each other's spirits. 
And then, with the roasting done, the meal set out, 
the others took their seats on chairs and stools, 
were just putting their hands to bread and meat 
when old Dolius trudged in with his sons, 
worn out from the fieldwork. 
The old Sicilian had gone and fetched them home, 
the mother who reared the boys and tended Dolius well, 
now that the years had ground the old man down ... 
When they saw Odysseus — knew him in their bones — 
they stopped in their tracks, staring, struck dumb, 
but the king waved them on with a warm and easy air: 
"Sit down to your food, old friend. Snap out of your wonder. 
We've been cooling our heels here long enough, 
eager to get our hands on all this pork, 
hoping you'd all troop in at any moment." 
Spreading his arms, Dolius rushed up to him, 
clutched Odysseus by the wrist and kissed his hand, 
greeting his king now with a burst of winging words: 
"Dear master, you're back — ^the answer to our prayers! 
We'd lost all hope, but the gods have brought you home! 
Welcome — health! The skies rain blessings on you! 
But tell me the truth now — this I'd like to know — 
shrewd Penelope, has she heard you're home? 
Or should we send a messenger?" 
"She knows by now, 
old man," his wily master answered brusquely. 
"Why busy yourself with that?" 
So Dolius went back to his sanded stool. 
His sons too, pressing around the famous king, 
greeted Odysseus warmly, grasped him by the hand, 
then took their seats in order by their father. 
But now, as they fell to supper in the lodge. 
Rumor the herald sped like wildfire through the city, 
crying out the news of the suitors' bloody death and doom, 
and massing from every quarter as they listened, kinsmen milled 
with wails and moans of grief before Odysseus' palace. 
And then they carried out the bodies, every family 
buried their own, and the dead from other towns 
they loaded onto the rapid ships for crews 
to ferry back again, each to his own home ... 
Then in a long, mourning file they moved to assembly 
where, once they'd grouped, crowding the meeting grounds, 
old lord Eupithes rose in their midst to speak out. 
Unforgettable sorrow wrung his heart for his son, 
Antinous, the first that great Odysseus killed. 
In tears for the one he lost, he stood and cried, 
"My friends, what a mortal blow this man has dealt 
to all our island people! Those fighters, many and brave, 
he led away in his curved ships — he lost the ships 
and he lost the men and back he comes again 
to kill the best of our Cephallenian princes. 
Quick, after him! Before he flees to Pylos 
or holy Elis, where Epeans rule in power — 
up, attack! Or we'll hang our heads forever, 
all disgraced, even by generations down the years, 
if we don't punish the murderers of our brothers and our sons! 
why, life would lose its relish — for me, at least — 
I'd rather die at once and go among the dead. 
Attack! — before the assassins cross the sea 
and leave us in their wake." 
He closed in tears 
and compassion ran through every Achaean there. 
Suddenly Medon and the inspired bard approached them, 
fresh from Odysseus' house, where they had just awakened. 
They strode into the crowds; amazement took each man 
but the herald Medon spoke in all his wisdom: 
"Hear me, men of Ithaca. Not without the hand 
of the deathless gods did Odysseus do these things! 
Myself, 1 saw an immortal fighting at his side — 
like Mentor to the life. 1 saw the same god, 
now in front of Odysseus, spurring him on, 
now stampeding the suitors through the hall, 
crazed with fear, and down they went in droves!" 
Terror gripped them all, their faces ashen white. 
At last the old warrior Halitherses, Master's son — 
who alone could see the days behind and days ahead — 
rose up and spoke, distraught for each man there: 
"Hear me, men of Ithaca. Hear what 1 have to say. 
Thanks to your own craven hearts these things were done! 
You never listened to me or the good commander Mentor, 
you never put a stop to your sons' senseless folly. 
What fine work they did, so blind, so reckless, 
carving away the wealth, affronting the wife 
of a great and famous man, telling themselves 
that he'd return no more! So let things rest now. 
Listen to me for once — 1 say don't attack! 
Else some will draw the lightning on their necks." 
So he urged 
and some held fast to their seats, but more than half 
sprang up with warcries now. They had no taste 
for the prophet's sane plan — ^winning Eupithes 
quickly won them over. They ran for armor 
and once they 'd harnessed up in burnished bronze 
they grouped in ranks before the terraced city. 
Eupithes led them on in their foolish, mad campaign, 
certain he would avenge the slaughter of his son 
but the father was not destined to return — 
he'd meet his death in battle then and there. 
Athena at this point made appeals to Zeus: 
"Father, son of Cronus, our high and mighty king, 
now let me ask you a guestion ... 
tell me the secrets hidden in your mind. 
Will you prolong the pain, the cruel fighting here 
or hand down pacts of peace between both sides?" 
"My child, " Zeus who marshals the thunderheads replied, 
"why do you pry and probe me so intently? Come now, 
wasn't the plan your own? You conceived it yourself: 
Odysseus should return and pay the traitors back. 
Do as your heart desires — 
but let me tell you Aowit should be done. 
Now that royal Odysseus has taken his revenge, 
let both sides seal their pacts that he shall reign for life, 
and let us purge their memories of the bloody slaughter 
of their brothers and their sons. Let them be friends, 
devoted as in the old days. Let peace and wealth 
come cresting through the land." 
So Zeus decreed 
and launched Athena already poised for action — 
down she swept from Olympus' craggy peaks. 
By then Odysseus' men had had their fill 
of hearty fare, and the seasoned captain said, 
"One of you go outside — see if they're closing in." 
A son of Dolius snapped to his command, 
ran to the door and saw them all too close 
and shouted back to Odysseus, 
"They're on top of us! To arms — and fast!" 
Up they sprang and strapped themselves in armor, 
the three men with Odysseus, Dolius' six sons 
and Dolius and Laertes clapped on armor too, 
gray as they were, but they would fight if forced. 
Once they had all harnessed up in burnished bronze 
they opened the doors and strode out, Odysseus in the lead. 
And now, taking the build and voice of Mentor, 
Zeus's daughter Athena marched right in. 
The good soldier Odysseus thrilled to see her, 
turned to his son and said in haste, "Telemachus, 
you'll learn soon enough — as you move up to fight 
where champions strive to prove themselves the best — 
not to disgrace your father's line a moment. 
In battle prowess we've excelled for ages 
all across the world." 
Telemachus reassured him, 
"Now you'll see, if you care to watch, father, 
now I'm fired up. Disgrace, you say? 
1 won't disgrace your line!" 
Laertes called out in deep delight, 
"What a day for me, dear gods! What joy — 
my son and my grandson vying over courage!" 
"Laertes!" 
Goddess Athena rushed beside him, eyes ablaze: 
"Son of Arcesius, dearest of all my comrades, 
say a prayer to the bright-eyed girl and Father Zeus, 
then brandish your long spear and wing it fast!" 
Athena breathed enormous strength in the old man. 
He lifted a prayer to mighty Zeus's daughter, 
brandished his spear a moment, winged it fast 
and hit Eupithes, pierced his bronze-sided helmet 
that failed to block the bronze point tearing through — 
down Eupithes crashed, his armor clanging against his chest. 
Odysseus and his gallant son charged straight at the front lines, 
slashing away with swords, with two-edged spears and now 
they would have killed them all, cut them off from home 
if Athena, daughter of storming Zeus, had not cried out 
in a piercing voice that stopped all fighters cold, 
"Hold back, you men of Ithaca, back from brutal war! 
Break off — shed no more blood — make peace at once!" 
So Athena commanded. Terror blanched their faces, 
they went limp with fear, weapons slipped from their hands 
and strewed the ground at the goddess' ringing voice. 
They spun in flight to the city, wild to save their lives, 
but loosing a savage cry, the long-enduring great Odysseus, 
gathering all his force, swooped like a soaring eagle — 
just as the son of Cronus hurled a reeking bolt 
that fell at her feet, the mighty Father's daughter, 
and blazing-eyed Athena wheeled on Odysseus, crying, 
"Royal son of Laertes, Odysseus, master of exploits, 
hold back now! Call a halt to the great leveler. War — 
don't court the rage of Zeus who rules the world!" 
So she commanded. He obeyed her, glad at heart. 
And Athena handed down her pacts of peace 
between both sides for all the years to come — 
the daughter of Zeus whose shield is storm and thunder, 
yes, but the goddess still kept Mentor's build and voice.