Rage—Goddess, sing the rage of Peleus' son Achilles,
murderous, doomed, that cost the Achaeans countless losses,
hurling down to the House of Death so many sturdy souls,
great fighters' souls, but made their bodies carrion,
feasts for the dogs and birds,
and the will of Zeus was moving toward its end.
Begin, Muse, when the two first broke and clashed,
Agamemnon lord of men and brilliant Achilles.

 

  What god drove them to fight with such a fury?
Apollo the son of Zeus and Leto. Incensed at the king
he swept a fatal plague through the army—men were dying
and all because Agamemnon spurned Apollo's priest.
Yes, Chryses approached the Achaeans' fast ships
to win his daughter back, bringing a priceless ransom
and bearing high in hand, wound on a golden staff,
the wreaths of the god, the distant deadly Archer.
He begged the whole Achaean army but most of all
the two supreme commanders, Atreus' two sons,
"Agamemnon, Menelaus—all Argives geared for war!
May the gods who hold the halls of Olympus give you
Priam's city to plunder, then safe passage home.
Just set my daughter free, my dear one . . . here,
accept these gifts, this ransom. Honor the god
who strikes from worlds away‑the son of Zeus, Apollo!"

 

  And all ranks of Achaeans cried out their assent:
"Respect the priest, accept the shining ransom!"
But it brought no joy to the heart of Agamemnon.
The king dismissed the priest with a brutal order
ringing in his ears: "Never again, old man,
let me catch sight of you by the hollow shipsl
Not loitering now, not slinking back tomorrow.
The staff and the wreaths of god will never save you then.
The girl—I won't give up the girl. Long before that,
old age will overtake her in my house, in Argos,
far from her fatherland, slaving back and forth
at the loom, forced to share my bed!

 

Now go,
don't tempt my wrath‑and you may depart alive."

 

  The old man was terrified. He obeyed the order,
turning, trailing away in silence down the shore
where the battle lines of breakers crash and drag.
And moving off to a safe distance, over and over
the old priest prayed to the son of sleek‑haired Leto,
lord Apollo, "Hear me, Apollo! God of the silver bow
who strides the walls of Chryse and Cilla sacrosanct—
­lord in power of Tenedos—Smintheus, god of the plague!
If I ever roofed a shrine to please your heart,
ever burned the long rich bones of bulls and goats
on your holy altar, now, now bring my prayer to pass.
Pay the Danaans back‑your arrows for my tears!"

 

  His prayer went up and Phoebus Apollo heard him.
Down he strode from Olympus' peaks, storming at heart
with his bow and hooded quiver slung across his shoulders.
The arrows clanged at his back as the god quaked with rage,
the god himself on the march and down he came like night.
Over against the ships he dropped to a knee, let fly a shaft
and a terrifying clash rang out from the great silver bow.
First he went for the mules and circling dogs but then,
launching a piercing shaft at the men themselves,
he cut them down in droves—
and the corpse‑fires burned on, night and day, no end in sight.

 

  Nine days the arrows of god swept through the army.
On the tenth Achilles called all ranks to muster—
the impulse seized him, sent by white‑armed Hera
grieving to see Achaean fighters drop and die.
Once they'd gathered, crowding the meeting grounds,
the swift runner Achilles rose and spoke among them:
"Son of Atreus, now we are beaten back, I fear,
the long campaign is lost. So home we sail . . .
if we can escape our death—if war and plague
are joining forces now to crush the Argives.
But wait: let us question a holy man,
a prophet, even a man skilled with dreams—
dreams as well can come our way from Zeus—
come, someone to tell us why Apollo rages so,
whether he blames us for a vow we failed, or sacrifice.
If only the god would share the smoky savor of lambs
and full‑grown goats, Apollo might be willing, still,
somehow, to save us from this plague."

 

  So he proposed
and down he sat again as Calchas rose among them,
Thestor's son, the clearest by far of all the seers
who scan the flight of birds. He knew all things that are,
all things that are past and all that are to come,
the seer who had led the Argive ships to Troy
with the second sight that god Apollo gave him.
For the armies' good the seer began to speak:
"Achilles, dear to Zeus . . .
you order me to explain Apollo's anger,
the distant deadly Archer? I will tell it all:
But strike a pact with me, swear you will defend me
with all your heart, with words and strength of hand.
For there is a man I will enrage—I see it now—
­a powerful man who lords it over all the Argives,
one the Achaeans must obey . . . A mighty king,
raging against an inferior, is too strong.
Even if he can swallow down his wrath today,
still he will nurse the burning in his chest
until, sooner or later, he sends it bursting forth.
Consider it closely, Achilles. Will you save me?"

 

  And the matchless runner reassured him: "Courage!
Out with it now, Calchas. Reveal the will of god,
whatever you may know. And I swear by Apollo
dear to Zeus, the power you pray to, Calchas,
when you reveal god's will to the Argives—no one,
not while I am alive and see the light on earth, no one
will lay his heavy hands on you by the hollow ships.
None among all the armies. Not even if you mean
Agamemnon here who now claims to be, by far,
the best of the Achaeans."

 

  The seer took heart
and this time he spoke out, bravely: "Beware­—
he casts no blame for a vow we failed, a sacrifice.
The god's enraged because Agamemnon spurned his priest,
he refused to free his daughter, he refused the ransom.
That's why the Archer sends us pains and he will send us more
and never drive this shameful destruction from the Argives,
not till we give back the girl with sparkling eyes
to her loving father‑no price, no ransom paid—
and carry a sacred hundred bulls to Chryse town.
Then we can calm the god, and only then appease him."

 

  So he declared and sat down. But among them rose
the fighting son of Atreus, lord of the far‑flung kingdoms,
Agamemnon—furious, his dark heart filled to the brim,
blazing with anger now, his eyes‑like searing fire.
With a sudden, killing look he wheeled on Calchas first:
"Seer of misery! Never a word that works to my advantage!
Always misery warms your heart, your prophecies—
never a word of profit said or brought to pass.
Now, again, you divine god's will for the armies,
bruit it about, as fact, why the deadly Archer
multiplies our pains: because I, I refused
that glittering price for the young girl Chryseis.
Indeed, I prefer her by far, the girl herself,
I want her mine in my own house! I rank her higher
than Clytemnestra, my wedded wife—she's nothing less
in build or breeding, in mind or works of hand.
But I am willing to give her back, even so,
if that is best for all. What I really want
is to keep my people safe, not see them dying.
But fetch me another prize, and straight off too,
else I alone of the Argives go without my honor.
That would be a disgrace: You are all witness,
look‑my prize is snatched away!"

 

  But the swift runner
Achilles answered him at once, "Just how, Agamemnon,
great field marshal . . . most grasping man alive,
how can the generous Argives give you prizes now?
I know of no troves of treasure, piled, lying idle,
anywhere. Whatever we dragged from towns we plundered,
all's been portioned out. But collect it, call it back
from the rank and file? That would be the disgrace.
So return the girl to the god, at least for now.
We Achaeans will pay you back, three, four times over,
if Zeus will grant us the gift, somehow, someday;
to raze Troy's massive ramparts to the ground."

 

  But King Agamemnon countered, "Not so quickly,
brave as you are, godlike Achilles‑trying to cheat me.
Oh no, you won't get past me, take me in that way!
What do you want? To cling to your own prize
while I sit calmly by‑empty‑handed here?
Is that why you order me to give her back?
No – if our generous Argives will give me a prize,
a match for my desires, equal to what I've lost,
well and good. But if they give me nothing
I will take a prize myself‑your own, or Ajax'
or Odysseus' prize‑I'll commandeer her myself
and let that man I go to visit choke with rage!
Enough. We'll deal with all this later, in due time.
Now come, we haul a black ship down to the bright sea,
gather a decent number of oarsmen along her locks
and put aboard a sacrifice, and Chryseis herself,
in all her beauty . . . we embark her too.
Let one of the leading captains take command.
Ajax, Idomeneus, trusty Odysseus or you, Achilles,
you—the most violent man alive ‑so you can perform
the rites for us and calm the god yourself."

 

  A dark glance
and the headstrong runner answered him in kind: "Shameless —­
armored in shamelessness‑always shrewd with greed!
How could any Argive soldier obey your orders,
freely and gladly do your sailing for you
or fight your enemies, full force? Not I, no.
It wasn't Trojan spearmen who brought me here to fight.
The Trojans never did me damage, not in the least,
they never stole my cattle or my horses, never
in Phthia where the rich soil breeds strong men
did they lay waste my crops. How could they?
Look at the endless miles that lie between us . . .
shadowy mountain ranges, seas that surge and thunder.
No, you colossal, shameless‑we all followed you,
to please you, to fight for you, to win your honor
back from the Trojans—Menelaus and you, you dog‑face!
What do you care? Nothing. You don't look right or left.
And now you threaten to strip me of my prize in person—
the one I fought for long and hard, and sons of Achaea
handed her to me.

 

My honors never equal yours,
whenever we sack some wealthy Trojan stronghold­—
my arms bear the brunt of the raw, savage fighting,
true, but when it comes to dividing up the plunder
the lion's share is yours, and back I go to my ships,
clutching some scrap, some pittance that I love,
when I have fought to exhaustion.

 

  No more now­—
back I go to Phthia. Better that way by far,
to journey home in the beaked ships of war.
I have no mind to linger here disgraced,
brimming your cup and piling up your plunder."

 

  But the lord of men Agamemnon shot back,
"Desert, by all means—if the spirit drives you home!
I will never beg you to stay, not on my account.
Never—others will take my side and do me honor,
Zeus above all, whose wisdom rules the world.
You—I hate you most of all the warlords
loved by the gods. Always dear to your heart,
strife, yes, and battles, the bloody grind of war.
What if you are a great soldier? That's just a gift of god.
Go home with your ships and comrades, lord it over your Myrmidons!
You are nothing to me‑you and your overweening anger!
But let this be my warning on your way:
since Apollo insists on taking my Chryseis,
I'll send her back in my own ships with my crew.
But I, I will be there in person at your tents
to take Briseis in all her beauty, your own prize—
so you can learn just how much greater I am than you
and the next man up may shrink from matching words with me,
from hoping to rival Agamemnon strength for strength!"

 

  He broke off and anguish gripped Achilles.
The heart in his tugged chest was pounding, torn . . .
Should he draw the long sharp sword slung at his hip,
thrust through the ranks and kill Agamemnon now?—
or check his rage and beat his fury down?
As his racing spirit veered back and forth,
just as he drew his huge blade from its sheath,
down from the vaulting heavens swept Athena,
the white‑armed goddess Hera sped her down:
Hera loved both men and cared for both alike.
Rearing behind him Pallas seized his fiery hair—
only Achilles saw her, none of the other fighters
struck with wonder he spun around, he knew her at once,
Pallas Athena! the terrible blazing of those eyes,
and his winged words went flying: "Why, why now?
Child of Zeus with the shield of thunder, why come now?
To witness the outrage Agamemnon just committed?
I tell you this, and so help me it's the truth—
he'll soon pay for his arrogance with his life!"

 

  Her gray eyes clear, the goddess Athena answered,
"Down from the skies I come to check your rage if only you will yield.
The white‑armed goddess Hera sped me down:
she loves you both, she cares for you both alike.
Stop this fighting, now. Don't lay hand to sword.
Lash him with threats of the price that he will face.
And I tell you this‑and I know it is the truth­ —
one day glittering gifts will lie before you,
three times over to pay for all his outrage.
Hold back now. Obey us both."

 

So she urged
and the swift runner complied at once: "I must—
when the two of you hand down commands, Goddess,
a man submits though his heart breaks with fury.
Better for him by far. If a man obeys the gods
they're quick to hear his prayers."

 

And with that
Achilles stayed his burly hand on the silver hilt
and slid the huge blade back in its sheath.
He would not fight the orders of Athena.
Soaring home to Olympus, she rejoined the gods
aloft in the halls of Zeus whose shield is thunder.

 

  But Achilles rounded on Agamemnon once again,
lashing out at him, not relaxing his anger for a moment:
"Staggering drunk, with your dog's eyes, your fawn's heart!
Never once did you arm with the troops and go to battle
or risk an ambush packed with Achaea's picked men—
­you lack the courage, you can see death coming.
Safer by far, you find, to foray all through camp,
commandeering the prize of any man who speaks against you.
King who devours his people! Worthless husks, the men you rule—
if not, Atrides, this outrage would have been your last.
I tell you this, and I swear a mighty oath upon it . . .
by this, this scepter, look,
that never again will put forth crown and branches,
now it's left its stump on the mountain ridge forever,
nor will it sprout new green again, now the brazen ax
has stripped its bark and leaves, and now the sons of Achaea
pass it back and forth as they hand their judgments down,
upholding the honored customs whenever Zeus commands —
­This scepter will be the mighty force behind my oath:
someday, I swear, a yearning for Achilles will strike
Achaea's sons and all your armies! But then, Atrides,
harrowed as you will be, nothing you do can save you—
not when your hordes of fighters drop and die,
cut down by the hands of man‑killing Hector! Then—
­then you will tear your heart out, desperate, raging
that you disgraced the best of the Achaeans!"

 

  Down on the ground
he dashed the scepter studded bright with golden nails,
then took his seat again. The son of Atreus smoldered,
glaring across at him, but Nestor rose between them,
the man of winning words, the clear speaker of Pylos . . .
Sweeter than honey from his tongue the voice flowed on and on.
Two generations of mortal men he had seen go down by now,
those who were born and bred with him in the old days,
in Pylos' holy realm, and now he ruled the third.
He pleaded with both kings, with clear good will,
"No more—or enormous sorrow comes to all Achaea!
How they would exult, Priam and Priam's sons
and all the Trojans. Oh they'd leap for joy
to hear the two of you battling on this way,
you who excel us all, first in Achaean councils,
first in the ways of war.

 

  Stop. Please.
Listen to Nestor. You are both younger than I,
and in my time I struck up with better men than you,
even you, but never once did they make light of me.
I've never seen such men, I never will again . . .
men like Pirithous, Dryas, that fine captain,
Caeneus and Exadius, and Polyphemus, royal prince,
and Theseus, Aegeus' boy, a match for the immortals.
They were the strongest mortals ever bred on earth,
the strongest, and they fought against the strongest too,
shaggy Centaurs, wild brutes of the mountains—
they hacked them down, terrible, deadly work.
And I was in their ranks, fresh out of Pylos,
far away from home‑they enlisted me themselves
and I fought on my own, a free lance, single‑handed.
And none of the men who walk the earth these days
could battle with those fighters, none, but they,
they took to heart my counsels, marked my words.
So now you listen too. Yielding is far better . . .
Don't seize the girl, Agamemnon, powerful as you are—
leave her, just as the sons of Achaea gave her,
his prize from the very first.
And you, Achilles, never hope to fight it out
with your king, pitting force against his force:
no one can match the honors dealt a king, you know,
a sceptered king to whom great Zeus gives glory.
Strong as you area goddess was your mother­
he has more power because he rules more men.
Atrides, end your anger‑look, it's Nestorl
I beg you, cool your fury against Achilles.
Here the man stands over all Achaea's armies,
our rugged bulwark braced for shocks of war."

 

  But King Agamemnon answered him in haste,
"True, old man—all you say is fit and proper—
but this soldier wants to tower over the armies,
he wants to rule over all, to lord it over all,
give out orders to every man in sight. Well,
there's one, I trust, who will never yield to him!
What if the everlasting gods have made a Spearman of him?
Have they entitled him to hurl abuse at me?"
  "Yes!"—blazing Achilles broke in quickly—
"What a worthless, burnt‑out coward I'd be called
if I would submit to you and all your orders,
whatever you blurt out. Fling them at others,
don't give me commands!
Never again, I trust, will Achilles yield to you.
And I tell you this‑take it to heart, I warn you—
­my hands will never do battle for that girl,
neither with you, King, nor any man alive.
You Achaeans gave her, now you've snatched her back.
But all the rest I possess beside my fast black ship—
not one bit of it can you seize against my will, Atrides.
Come, try it! So the men can see, that instant,
your black blood gush and spurt around my spear!"

 

  Once the two had fought it out with words,
battling face‑to‑face, both sprang to their feet
and broke up the muster beside the Argive squadrons.
Achilles strode off to his trim ships and shelters,
back to his friend Patroclus and their comrades.
Agamemnon had a vessel hauled down to the sea,
he picked out twenty oarsmen to man her locks,
put aboard the cattle for sacrifice to the god
and led Chryseis in all her beauty amidships.
Versatile Odysseus took the helm as captain.

 

  All embarked,
the patty launched out on the sea's foaming lanes
while the son of Atreus told his troops to wash,
to purify themselves from the filth of plague.
They scoured it off, threw scourings in the surf
and sacrificed to Apollo full‑grown bulls and goats
along the beaten shore of the fallow barren sea
and savory smoke went swirling up the skies.

 

  So the men were engaged throughout the camp.
But King Agamemnon would not stop the quarrel,
the first threat he hurled against Achilles.
He called Talthybius and Eurybates briskly,
his two heralds, ready, willing aides:
"Go to Achilles' lodge. Take Briseis at once,
his beauty Briseis by the hand and bring her here.
But if he will not surrender her, I'll go myself,
I'll seize her myself, with an army at my back—
and all the worse for him!"

 

  He sent them off
with the strict order ringing in their ears.
Against their will the two men made their way
along the breaking surf of the barren salt sea
and reached the Myrmidon shelters and their ships.
They found him beside his lodge and black hull,
seated grimly—and Achilles took no joy
when he saw the two approaching.
They were afraid, they held the king in awe
and stood there, silent. Not a word to Achilles,
not a question. But he sensed it all in his heart,
their fear, their charge, and broke the silence for them:
"Welcome, couriers! Good heralds of Zeus and men,
here, come closer. You have done nothing to me.
You are not to blame. No one but Agamemnon—
he is the one who sent you for Briseis.
Go, Patroclus, Prince, bring out the girl
and hand her to them so they can take her back.
But let them both bear witness to my loss . . .
in the face of blissful gods and mortal men,
in the face of that unbending, ruthless king—
if the day should come when the armies need me
to save their ranks from ignominious, stark defeat.
The man is raving—with all the murderous fury in his heart.
He lacks the sense to see a day behind, a day ahead,
and safeguard the Achaeans battling by the ships."

 

  Patroclus obeyed his great friend's command.
He led Briseis in all her beauty from the lodge
and handed her over to the men to take away.
And the two walked back along the Argive ships
while she trailed on behind, reluctant, every step.
But Achilles wept, and slipping away from his companions,
far apart, sat down on the beach of the heaving gray sea
and scanned the endless ocean. Reaching out his arms,
again and again he prayed to his dear mother:
"Mother! You gave me life, short as that life will be,
so at least Olympian Zeus, thundering up on high,
should give me honor‑but now he gives me nothing.
Atreus' son Agamemnon, for all his far‑flung kingdoms—
the man disgraces me, seizes and keeps my prize,
he tears her away himself!"

 

  So he wept and prayed
and his noble mother heard him, seated near her father,
the Old Man of the Sea in the salt green depths.
Suddenly up she rose from the churning surf
like mist and settling down beside him as he wept,
stroked Achilles gently, whispering his name, "My child—
why in tears? What sorrow has touched your heart?
Tell me, please. Don't harbor it deep inside you.
We must share it all."

 

And now from his depths
the proud runner groaned: "You know, you know,
why labor through it all? You know it all so well . . .
We raided Thebe once, Eetion's sacred citadel,
we ravaged the place, hauled all the plunder here
and the armies passed it round, share and share alike,
and they chose the beauty Chryseis for Agamemnon.
But soon her father, the holy priest of Apollo
the distant deadly Archer, Chryses approached
the fast trim ships of the Argives armed in bronze
to win his daughter back, bringing a priceless ransom
and bearing high in hand, wound on a golden staff,
the wreaths of the god who strikes from worlds away.
He begged the whole Achaean army but most of all
the two supreme commanders, Atreus' two sons,
and all ranks of Achaeans cried out their assent,
'Respect the priest, accept the shining ransom!'
But it brought no joy to the heart of Agamemnon,
our high and mighty king dismissed the priest|
with a brutal order ringing in his ears.
And shattered with anger, the old man withdrew
but Apollo heard his prayer—he loved him, deeply—
he loosed his shaft at the Argives, withering plague,
and now the troops began to drop and die in droves,
the arrows of god went showering left and right,
whipping through the Achaeans' vast encampment.
But the old seer who knew the cause full well
revealed the will of the archer god Apollo.
And I was the first, mother, I urged them all,
'Appease the god at once!' That's when the fury
gripped the son of Atreus. Agamemnon leapt to his feet
and hurled his threat—his threat's been driven home.
One girl, Chryseis, the fiery‑eyed Achaeans
ferry out in a fast trim ship to Chryse Island,
laden with presents for the god. The other girl,
just now, the heralds came and led her away from camp,
Briseus' daughter, the prize the armies gave me.
But you, mother, if you have any power at all,
rotect your son! Go to Olympus, plead with Zeus,
if you ever warmed his heart with a word or any action . . .

 

  Time and again I heard your claims in father's halls,
boasting how you and you alone of all the immortals
rescued Zeus, the lord of the dark storm cloud,
from ignominious, stark defeat . . .
That day the Olympians tried to chain him down,
Hera, Poseidon lord of the sea, and Pallas Athena—
you rushed to Zeus, dear Goddess, broke those chains,
quickly ordered the hundred‑hander to steep Olympus,
that monster whom the immortals call Briareus
but every mortal calls the Sea‑god's son, Aegaeon,
though he's stronger than his father. Down he sat,
flanking Cronus' son, gargantuan in the glory of it all,
and the blessed gods were struck with terror then,
they stopped shackling Zeus.
  Remind him of that,
now, go and sit beside him, grasp his knees . . .
persuade him, somehow, to help the Trojan cause,
to pin the Achaeans back against their ships,
trap them round the bay and mow them down.
So all can reap the benefits of their king­
so even mighty Atrides can see how mad he was
to disgrace Achilles, the best of the Achaeans!"
  And Thetis answered, bursting into tears,
"O my son, my sorrow, why did I ever bear you?
All I bore was doom . . .
Would to god you could linger by your ships
without a grief in the world, without a torment!
Doomed to a short life, you have so little time.
And not only short, now, but filled with heartbreak too,
more than all other men alive—doomed twice over.
Ah to a cruel fate I bore you in our halls!
Still, I shall go to Olympus crowned with snow
and repeat your prayer to Zeus who loves the lightning.
Perhaps he will be persuaded.

 

  But you, my child,
stay here by the fast ships, rage on at the Achaeans,
just keep clear of every foray in the fighting.
Only yesterday Zeus went off to the Ocean River
to feast with the Aethiopians, loyal, lordly men,
and all the gods went with him. But in twelve days
the Father returns to Olympus. Then, for your sake,
up I go to the bronze floor, the royal house of Zeus—
I'll grasp his knees, I think I'll win him over."

 

  With that vow
his mother went away and left him there, alone,
his heart inflamed for the sashed and lovely girl
they'd wrenched away from him against his will.
Meanwhile Odysseus drew in close to Chryse Island,
bearing the splendid sacrifice in the vessel's hold.
And once they had entered the harbor deep in bays
they furled and stowed the sail in the black ship,
they lowered the mast by the forestays, smoothly,
quickly let it down on the forked mast‑crutch
and rowed her into a mooring under oars.
Out went the bow-stones—cables fast astern—
­and the crew themselves swung out in the breaking surf,
leading out the sacrifice for the archer god Apollo,
and out of the deep‑sea ship Chryseis stepped too.
Then tactful Odysseus led her up to the altar,
placing her in her loving father's arms, and said,
"Chryses, the lord of men Agamemnon sent me here
to bring your daughter back and perform a sacrifice,
a grand sacrifice to Apollo—for all Achaea's sake—
so we can appease the god
who's loosed such grief and torment on the Argives."

 

  With those words he left her in Chryses' arms
and the priest embraced the child he loved, exultant.
At once the men arranged the sacrifice for Apollo,
making the cattle ring his well‑built altar,
then they rinsed their hands and took up barley.
Rising among them Chryses stretched his arms to the sky
and prayed in a high resounding voice, "Hear me, Apollo!
God of the silver bow who strides the walls of Chryse
and Cilla sacrosanct—lord in power of Tenedos!
If you honored me last time and heard my prayer
and rained destruction down on all Achaea's ranks,
now bung my prayer to pass once more. Now, at last,
drive this killing plague from the armies of Achaea!"

 

  His prayer went up and Phoebus Apollo heard him.
And soon as the men had prayed and flung the barley,
first they lifted back the heads of the victims,
slit their throats, skinned them and carved away
the meat from the thighbones and wrapped them in fat,
a double fold sliced clean and topped with strips of flesh.
And the old man burned these over dried split wood
and over the quarters poured out glistening wine
while young men at his side held five‑pronged forks.
Once they had burned the bones and tasted the organs
they cut the rest into pieces, pierced them with spits,
roasted them to a turn and pulled them off the fire.
The work done, the feast laid out, they ate well
 and no man's hunger lacked a share of the banquet.
When they had put aside desire for food and drink,
the young men brimmed the mixing bowls with wine
and tipping first drops for the god in every cup
they poured full rounds for all. And all day long
they appeased the god with song, raising a ringing hymn
to the distant archer god who drives away the plague,
those young Achaean warriors singing out his power,
and Apollo listened, his great heart warm with joy.

 

  Then when the sun went down and night came on
they made their beds and slept by the stern‑cables . . .
When young Dawn with her rose‑red fingers shone once more,
they set sail for the main encampment of Achaea.
The Archer sent them a bracing following wind,
they stepped the mast, spread white sails wide,
the wind hit full and the canvas bellied out
and a dark blue wave, foaming up at the bow,
sang out loud and strong as the ship made way,
skimming the whitecaps, cutting toward her goal.
And once offshore of Achaea's vast encampment
they eased her in and hauled the black ship high,
far up on the sand, and shored her up with timbers.
Then they scattered, each to his own ship and shelter.

 

  But he raged on, grimly camped by his fast fleet,
the royal son of Peleus, the swift runner Achilles.
Now he no longer haunted the meeting grounds
where men win glory, now he no longer went to war
but day after day he ground his heart out, waiting there,
yearning, always yearning for battle cries and combat.

 

  But now as the twelfth dawn after this shone clear
the gods who live forever marched home to Olympus,
all in a long cortege, and Zeus led their on.
And Thetis did not forget her son's appeals.
She broke from a cresting wave at first light
and soaring up to the broad sky and Mount Olympus,
found the son of Cronus gazing down on the world,
peaks apart from the other gods and seated high
on the topmost crown of rugged ridged Olympus.
And crouching down at his feet,
quickly grasping his knees with her left hand,
her right hand holding him underneath the chin,
she prayed to the lord god Zeus, the son of Cronus:
"Zeus, Father Zeus! If I ever served you well
among the deathless gods with a word or action,
bring this prayer to pass: honor my son Achilles!—
doomed to the shortest life of any man on earth.
And now the lord of men Agamemnon has disgraced him,
seizes and keeps his prize, tears her away himself. But you—
exalt him, Olympian Zeus: your urgings rule the world!
Come, grant the Trojans victory after victory
till the Achaean armies pay my dear son back,
building higher the honor he deserves!"
She paused
but Zeus who commands the storm clouds answered nothing.
The Father sat there, silent. It seemed an eternity . . .
But Thetis, clasping his knees, held on, clinging,
pressing her question once again: "Grant my prayer,
once and for all, Father, bow your head in assent!
Or deny me outright. What have you to fear?
So I may know, too well, just how cruelly
I am the most dishonored goddess of them all."
  Filled with anger
Zeus who marshals the storm clouds answered her at last:
"Disaster. You will drive me into war with Hera.
She will provoke me, she with her shrill abuse.
Even now in the face of all the immortal gods
she harries me perpetually, Hera charges me
that I always go to battle for the Trojans.
Away with you now. Hera might catch us here.
I will see to this. I will bring it all to pass.
Look, I will bow my head if that will satisfy you.
That, I remind you, that among the immortal gods
is the strongest, truest sign that I can give.
No word or work of mine‑nothing can be revoked,
there is no treachery, nothing left unfinished
once I bow my head to say it shall be done."

 

  So he decreed. And Zeus the son of Cronus bowed
his craggy dark brows and the deathless locks came pouring
down from the thunderhead of the great immortal king
and giant shock waves spread through all Olympus.

 

  So the two of them made their pact and parted.
Deep in the sea she dove from radiant Mount Olympus.
Zeus went back to his own halls, and all the gods
in full assembly rose from their seats at once
to meet the Father striding toward them now
None dared remain at rest as Zeus advanced,
they all sprang up to greet him face‑to‑face
as he took his place before them on his throne.
But Hera knew it all. She had seen how Thetis,
the Old Man of the Sea's daughter, Thetis quick
on her glistening feet was hatching plans with Zeus.
And suddenly Hera taunted the Father, son of Cronus:
"So, who of the gods this time, my treacherous one,
was hatching plans with you?
Always your pleasure, whenever my back is turned,
to settle things in your grand clandestine way.
You never deign, do you, freely and frankly,
to share your plots with me—never, not a word!"

 

  The father of men and gods replied sharply,
"Hera—stop hoping to fathom all my thoughts.
You will find them a trial, though you are my wife.
Whatever is right for you to hear, no one, trust me,
will know of it before you, neither god nor man.
Whatever I choose to plan apart from all the gods—
no more of your everlasting questions, probe and pry no more."

 

  And Hera the Queen, her dark eyes wide, exclaimed,
"Dread majesty, son of Cronus, what are you saying?
Now surely I've never probed or pried in the past.
Why, you can scheme to your heart's content
without a qualm in the world for me. But now
I have a terrible fear that she has won you over,
Thetis, the Old Man of the Sea's daughter, Thetis
with her glistening feet. I know it. Just at dawn
she knelt down beside you and grasped your knees
and I suspect you bowed your head in assent to her—
­you granted once and for all to exalt Achilles
now arid slaughter hordes of Achaeans pinned against their ships."

 

  And Zeus who marshals the thunderheads returned,
"Maddening one . . . you and your eternal suspicions —
can never escape you. Ah but tell me, Hera,
just what can you do about all this? Nothing.
Only estrange yourself from me a little more—
and all the worse for you.
If what you say is true, that must be my pleasure.
Now go sit down. Be quiet now. Obey my orders,
for fear the gods, however many Olympus holds,
are powerless to protect you when I come
to throttle you with my irresistible hands."
  He subsided
but Hera the Queen, her eyes wider, was terrified.
She sat in silence. She wrenched her will to his.
And throughout the halls of Zeus the gods of heaven
quaked with fear. Hephaestus the Master Craftsman
rose up first to harangue them all, trying now
to bring his loving mother a little comfort,
the white‑armed goddess Hera: "Oh disaster . . .
that's what it is, and it will be unbearable
if the two of you must come to blows this way,
flinging the gods in chaos just for mortal men.
No more joy for us in the sumptuous feast
when riot rules the day.
I urge you, mother—you know that I am right—
work back into his good graces, so the Father,
our beloved Father will never wheel on us again,
send our banquets crashing! The Olympian lord of lightning—
what if he would like to blast us from our seats?
He is far too strong. Go back to him, mother,
stroke the Father with soft, winning words—
at once the Olympian will turn kind to us again."

 

  Pleading, springing up with a two‑handled cup,
he reached it toward his loving mother's hands
with his own winning words: "Patience, mother!
Grieved as you are, bear up, or dear as you are,
I have to see you beaten right before my eyes.
I would be shattered‑what could I do to save you?
It's hard to fight the Olympian strength for strength.
You remember the last time I rushed to your defense?
He seized my foot, he hurled me off the tremendous threshold
and all day long I dropped, I was dead weight and then,
when the sun went down, down I plunged on Lemnos,
little breath left in me. But the mortals there
soon nursed a fallen immortal back to life."

 

  At that the white‑armed goddess Hera smiled
and smiling, took the cup from her child's hands.
Then dipping sweet nectar up from the mixing bowl
he poured it round to all the immortals, left to right.
And uncontrollable laughter broke from the happy gods
as they watched the god of fire breathing hard
and bustling through the halls.
  That hour then
and all day long till the sun went down they feasted
and no god's hunger lacked a share of the handsome banquet
or the gorgeous lyre Apollo struck or the Muses singing
voice to voice in choirs, their vibrant music rising.

 

  At last, when the sun's fiery light had set,
each immortal went to rest in his own house,
the splendid high halls Hephaestus built for each
with all his craft and cunning, the famous crippled Smith.
And Olympian Zeus the lord of lightning went to his own bed
where he had always lain when welcome sleep came on him.
There he climbed and there he slept and by his side
lay Hera the Queen, the goddess of the golden throne.

Now the great array of gods and chariot-driving men
slept all night long, but the peaceful grip of sleep
could not hold Zeus, turning it over in his mind ...
how to exalt Achilles?-how to slaughter
hordes of Achaeans pinned against their ships?
As his spirit churned, at last one plan seemed best:
he would send a murderous dream to Agamemnon.
Calling out to the vision, Zeus winged it on:
"Go, murderous Dream, to the fast Achaean ships
and once you reach Agamemnon's shelter rouse him,
order him, word-for-word, exactly as I command.
Tell Atrides to arm his long-haired Achaeans,
to attack at once, full force-
now he can take the broad streets of Troy.
The immortal gods who hold Olympus clash no more,
Hera's appeals have brought them round and all agree:
griefs are about to crush the men of Troy."
At that command
the dream went winging off, and passing quickly
along the fast trim ships, made for the king
and found him soon, sound asleep in his tent
with refreshing godsent slumber drifted round him.
Hovering at his head the vision rose like Nestor,
Neleus' son, the chief Agamemnon honored most.
Inspired with Nestor's voice and sent by Zeus,
the dream cried out, "Still asleep, Agamemnon?
The son of Atreus, that skilled breaker of horses?
How can you sleep all night, a man weighed down with duties?
Your armies turning over their lives to your command-
responsibilities so heavy. Listen to me, quickly!
I bring you a message sent by Zeus, a world away
but he has you in his heart, he pities-you now ...
Zeus commands you to arm your long-haired Achaeans,
to attack at once, full force-
now you can take the broad streets of Troy!
The immortal gods who hold Olympus clash no more,
Hera's appeals have brought them round and all agree:
griefs from Zeus are about to crush the men of Troy!
But keepthis message firmly in your mind.
Remember-let no loss of memory overcome you
when the sweet grip of slumber sets you free."

 

  With that the dream departed, leaving him there,
his heart racing with hopes that would not come to pass.
He thought he would take the city of Priam then,
that very day, the fool. How could he know
what work the Father had in mind? The Father,
still bent on plaguing the Argives and Trojans both
with wounds and groans in the bloody press of battle.
But rousing himself from sleep, the divine voice
swirling round him, Atrides sat up, bolt awake,
pulled on- a soft tunic, linen never worn,
and over it threw his flaring battle-cape,
under his smooth feet he fastened supple sandals,
across his shoulder slung his silver-studded sword.
Then he seized the royal scepter of his fathers-
its power can never die-and grasping it tightly
off he strode to the ships of Argives armed in bronze.

 

  Now the goddess Dawn climbed up to Olympus heights,
declaring the light of day to Zeus and the deathless gods
as the king commanded heralds to cry out loud and clear
and muster the long-haired Achaeans to full assembly.
Their cries rang out. Battalions gathered quickly.

 

  But first he called his ranking chiefs to council
beside the ship of Nestor, the warlord born in Pylos.
Summoning them together there Atrides set forth
his cunning, foolproof plan: "Hear me, friends-
a dream sent by the gods has come to me in sleep.
Down through the bracing godsent night it came
like good Nestor in features, height and build,
the old king himself, and hovering at my head
the dream called me on: 'Still asleep, Agamemnon?
The son of Atreus, that skilled breaker of horses?
How can you sleep all night, a man weighed down with duties?
Your armies turning over their lives to your command-
responsibilities so heavy. Listen to me, quickly!
I bring you a message sent by Zeus, a world away
but he has you in his heart, he pities you now .. .
Zeus commands you to arm your long-haired Achaeans,
to attack at once, full force-
now you can take the broad streets of Troy!
The immortal gods who hold Olympus clash no more,
Hera's appeals have brought them round and all agree:
griefs from Zeus are about to crush the men of Troy!
But keep this message firmly in your mind.’
With that
the dream went winging off and soothing sleep released me.
Come-see if we can arm the Achaeans for assault.
But first, according to time-honored custom,
I will test the men with a challenge, tell them all
to crowd the oarlocks, cut and run in their ships.
But you take up your battle-stations at every point,
command them, hold them back."
So much for his plan.
Agamemnon took his seat and Nestor rose among them.
Noble Nestor the king of Pylos' sandy harbor
spoke and urged them on with all good will:
"Friends, lords of the Argives, 0 my captains!
If any other Achaean had told us of this dream
we'd call it false and turn our backs upon it.
But look, the man who saw it has every claim
to be the best, the bravest Achaean we can field.
Come-see if we can arm the Achaeans for assault."

 

  And out he marched, leading the way from council.
The rest sprang to their feet, the sceptered kings
obeyed the great field marshal. Rank and file
streamed behind and rushed like swarms of bees
pouring out of a rocky hollow, burst on endless burst,
bunched in clusters seething over the first spring blooms,
dark hordes swirling into the air, this way, that way-
so the many armed platoons from the ships and tents
came marching on, close-file, along the deep wide beach
to crowd the meeting grounds, and Rumor, Zeus's crier,
like wildfire blazing among them, whipped them on.
The troops assembled. The meeting grounds shook.
The earth groaned and rumbled under the huge weight
as soldiers took positions-the whole place in uproar.
Nine heralds shouted out, trying to keep some order,
"Quiet, battalions, -silence! Hear your royal kings!"
The men were forced to their seats, marshaled into ranks,
the shouting died away . . . silence.
King Agamemnon
rose to his feet, raising high in hand the scepter
Hephaestus made with all his strength and skill.
Hephaestus gave it to Cronus' son, Father Zeus,
and Zeus gave it to Hermes, the giant-killing Guide
and Hermes gave it to Pelops, that fine charioteer,
Pelops gave it to Atreus, marshal of fighting men,
who died and passed it on to Thyestes rich in flocks
and he in turn bestowed it on Agamemnon, to bear on high
as he ruled his many islands and lorded mainland Argos.
Now, leaning his weight upon that kingly scepter,
Atrides declared his will to all Achaea's armies:
"Friends-fighting Danaans, aides-in-arms of Ares!
Cronus' son has trapped me in madness, blinding ruin-
Zeus is a harsh, cruel god. He vowed to me long ago,
he bowed his head that I should never embark for home
till I had brought the walls of Ilium crashing down.
But now, I see, he only plotted brutal treachery:
now he commands me back to Argos in disgrace,
whole regiments of my men destroyed in battle.
So it must please his overweening heart, who knows?
Father Zeus has lopped the crowns of a thousand cities,
true, and Zeus will lop still more-his power is too great.
What humiliation! Even for generations still to come,
to learn that Achaean armies so strong, so vast,
fought a futile war ... We are still fighting it,
no end in sight, and battling forces we outnumber-
by far. Say that Trojans and Argives both agreed
to swear a truce, to seal their oaths in blood,
and opposing sides were tallied out in full:
count one by one the Trojans who live in Troy
but count our Achaeans out by ten-man squads
and each squad pick a Trojan to pour its wine-
many Achaean tens would lack their steward then!
That's how far we outnumber them, I'd say-Achaeans
to Trojans-the men who hail from Troy at least.
But they have allies called from countless cities,
fighters brandishing spears who block my way,
who throw me far off course,
thwarting my will to plunder Ilium's rugged walls.
And now nine years of almighty Zeus have marched by,
our ship timbers rot and the cables snap and fray
and across the sea our wives and helpless children
wait in the halls, wait for our return ... And we?
Our work drags on, unfinished as always, hopeless-
the labor of war that brought us here to Troy.
So come, follow my orders. All obey me now.
Cut and run! Sail home to the fatherland we love!
We'll never take the broad streets of Troy."
Testing his men
but he only made the spirit race inside their chests,
all the rank and file who'd never heard his plan.
And the whole assembly surged like big waves at sea,
the Icarian Sea when East and South Winds drive it on,
blasting down in force from the clouds of Father Zeus,
or when the West Wind shakes the deep standing grain
with hurricane gusts that flatten down the stalks-
so the massed assembly of troops was shaken now.
They cried in alarm and charged toward the ships
and the dust went whirling up from under rushing feet
as the men jostled back and forth, shouting orders-
"Grapple the ships! Drag them down to the bright sea!
Clean out the launching-channels!" Shrill shouts
hitting the heavens, fighters racing for home,
knocking the blocks out underneath the hulls.

 

  And now they might have won their journey home,
the men of Argos fighting the will of fate, yes,
if Hera had not alerted Athena: "Inconceivable!
Child of Zeus whose battle-shield is thunder,
tireless one, Athena-what, is this the way?
All the Argives flying home to their fatherland,
sailing over the sea's broad back? Leaving Priam
and all the men of Troy a trophy to glory over,
Helen of Argos, Helen for whom so many Argives
lost their lives in Troy, far from native land.
Go, range the ranks of Achaeans armed in bronze.
With your winning words hold back each man you find-
don't let them haul their rolling ships to sea!"

 

  The bright-eyed goddess Pallas lost no time.
Down she flashed from the peaks of Mount Olympus,
quickly reached the ships and found Odysseus first,
a mastermind like Zeus, still standing fast.
He had not laid a hand on his black benched hull,
such anguish racked his heart and fighting spirit.
Now close beside him the bright-eyed goddess stood
and urged him on: "Royal son of Laertes, Odysseus,
great tactician-what, is this the way?
All you Argives flying home to your fatherland,
tumbling into your oar-swept ships? Leaving Priam
and all the men of Troy a trophy to glory over,
Helen of Argos, Helen for whom so many Argives
lost their lives in Troy, far from native land!
No, don't give up now. Range the Achaean ranks,
with your winning words hold back each man you find-
don't let them haul their rolling ships to sea!"

 

  He knew the goddess' voice-he went on the run,
flinging off his cape as Eurybates picked it up,
the herald of Ithaca always at his side.
Coming face-to-face with Atrides Agamemnon,
he relieved him of his fathers' royal scepter-
its power can never die-and grasping it tightly
off he strode to the ships of Argives armed in bronze.

 

Whenever Odysseus met some man of rank, a king,
he'd halt and hold him back with winning words:
"My friend-it's wrong to threaten you like a coward,
but you stand fast, you keep your men in check!
It's too soon to see Agamemnon's purpose clearly.
Now he's only testing us, soon he'll bear down hard.
Didn't we all hear his plan in secret council?
God forbid his anger destroy the army he commands.
The rage of kings is strong, they're nursed by the gods,
their honor comes from Zeus-
they're dear to Zeus, the god who rules the world."

 

  When he caught some common soldier shouting out,
he'd beat him with the scepter, dress him down:
"You fool-sit still! Obey the commands of others,
your superiors-you, you deserter, rank coward,
you count for nothing, neither in war nor council.
How can all Achaeans be masters here in Troy?
Too many kings can ruin an army-mob rule!
Let there be one commander, one master only,
endowed by the son of crooked-minded Cronus
with kingly scepter and royal rights of custom:
whatever one man needs to lead his people well."

 

  So he ranged the ranks, commanding men to order-
and back again they surged from ships and shelters,
back to the meeting grounds with a deep pounding din,
thundering out as battle lines of breakers crash and drag
along some endless beach, and the rough sea roars.

 

  The armies took their seats, marshaled into ranks.
But one man, Thersites, still railed on, nonstop.
His head was full of obscenities, teeming with rant,
all for no good reason, insubordinate, baiting the kings-
anything to provoke some laughter from the troops.
Here was the ugliest man who ever came to Troy.
Bandy-legged he was, with one foot clubbed,
both shoulders humped together, curving over
his caved-in chest, and bobbing above them
his skull warped to a point,
sprouting clumps of scraggly, woolly hair.
Achilles despised him most, Odysseus too-
he was always abusing both chiefs, but now
he went for majestic Agamemnon, hollering out,
taunting the king with strings of cutting insults.
The Achaeans were furious with him, deeply offended.
But he kept shouting at Agamemnon, spewing his abuse:
"Still moaning and groaning, mighty Atrides-why now?
What are you panting after now? Your shelters packed
with the lion's share of bronze, plenty of women too,
crowding your lodges. Best of the lot, the beauties
we hand you first, whenever we take some stronghold.
Or still more gold you're wanting? More ransom a son
of the stallion-breaking Trojans might just fetch from Troy?-
though I or another hero drags him back in chains ...
Or a young woman, is it?-to spread and couple,
to bed down for yourself apart from all the troops?
How shameful for you, the high and mighty commander,
to lead the sons of Achaea into bloody slaughter!
Sons? No, my soft friends, wretched excuses-
women, not men of Achaea! Home we go in our ships!
Abandon him here in Troy to wallow in all his prizes-
he'll see if the likes of us have propped him up or not.
Look-now it's Achilles, a greater man he disgraces,
seizes and keeps his prize, tears her away himself.
But no gall in Achilles. Achilles lets it go.
If not, Atrides, that outrage would have been your last!"

 

  So Thersites taunted the famous field marshal.
But Odysseus stepped in quickly, faced him down
with a dark glance and threats to break his nerve:
"What a flood of abuse, Thersites! Even for you,
fluent and flowing as you are. Keep quiet.
Who are you to wrangle with kings, you alone?
No one, I say-no one alive less soldierly than you,
none in the ranks that came to Troy with Agamemnon.
So stop your babbling, mouthing the names of kings,
flinging indecencies in their teeth, your eyes
peeled for a chance to cut and run for home.
We can have no idea, no clear idea at all
how the long campaign will end ...
whether Achaea's sons will make it home unharmed
or slink back in disgrace.
But there you sit,
hurling abuse at the son of Atreus, Agamemnon,
marshal of armies, simply because our fighters
give Atrides the lion's share of all our plunder.
You and your ranting slander you're the outrage.

I tell you this, so help me it's the truth:
if I catch you again, blithering on this way,
let Odysseus' head be wrenched off his shoulders,
never again call me the father of Telemachus
if I don't grab you, strip the clothing off you,
cloak, tunic and rags that wrap your private parts,
and whip you howling naked back to the fast ships,
out of the armies' muster-whip you like a cur!"

 

  And he cracked the scepter across his back and shoulders.
The rascal doubled over, tears streaking his face
and a bloody welt bulged up between his blades,
under the stroke of the golden scepter's studs.
He squatted low, cringing, stunned with pain,
blinking like some idiot ...
rubbing his tears off dumbly with a fist.
Their morale was low but the men laughed now,
good hearty laughter breaking over Thersites' head-
glancing at neighbors they would shout, "A terrific stroke!
A thousand terrific strokes he's carried off Odysseus,
taking the lead in tactics, mapping battle-plans.
But here's the best thing yet he's done for the men-
he's put a stop to this babbling, foulmouthed fool!
Never again, I'd say, will our gallant comrade
risk his skin to attack the kings with insults."

 

  So the soldiers bantered but not Odysseus.
The raider of cities stood there, scepter in hand,
and close beside him the great gray-eyed Athena
rose like a herald, ordering men to silence. All,
from the first to lowest ranks of Achaea's troops,
should hear his words and mark his counsel well.
For the good of all he urged them: "Agamemnon!
Now, my king, the Achaeans are bent on making you
a disgrace in the eyes of every man alive. Yes,
they fail to fulfill their promise sworn that day
they sailed here from the stallion-land of Argos:
that not until you had razed the rugged walls of Troy
would they sail home again. But look at them now,
like green, defenseless boys or widowed women
whimpering to each other, wailing to journey back.
True, they've labored long-they're desperate for home.
Any fighter, cut off from his wife for one month,
would chafe at the benches, moaning in his ship,
pinned down by gales and heavy, raging seas.
A month-but look at us.
This is the ninth year come round, the ninth
we've hung on here. Who could blame the Achaeans
for chafing, bridling beside the beaked ships?
Ah but still-what a humiliation it would be
to hold out so long, then sail home empty-handed.
Courage, my friends, hold out a little longer.
Till we see if Caichas divined the truth or not.
We all recall that moment-who could forget it?
We were all witnesses then. All, at least,
the deadly spirits have not dragged away ...

 

Why,
it seems like only yesterday or the day before
when our vast armada gathered, moored at Aulis,
freighted with slaughter bound for Priam's Troy.
We were all busy then, milling round a spring
and offering victims up on the holy altars,
full sacrifice to the gods to guarantee success,
under a spreading plane tree where the water splashed,
glittering in the sun-when a great omen appeared.
A snake, and his back streaked red with blood,
a thing of terror! Olympian Zeus himself
had launched him into the clean light of day ...
He slid from under the altar, glided up the tree
and there the brood of a sparrow, helpless young ones,
teetered high on the topmost branch-tips, cowering
under the leaves there, eight they were all told
and the mother made the ninth, she'd borne them all-
chirping to break the heart but the snake gulped them down
and the mother cried out for her babies, fluttering over him ...
he coiled, struck, fanging her wing-a high thin shriek!
But once he'd swallowed down the sparrow with her brood,
the son of crooked Cronus who sent the serpent forth
turned him into a sign, a monument clear to see-
Zeus struck him to stone! And we stood by,'
amazed that such a marvel came to light.
So then,
when those terrible, monstrous omens burst in
on the victims we were offering to the gods,
Calchas swiftly revealed the will of Zeus:
'Why struck dumb now, my long-haired Achaeans?
Zeus who rules the world has shown us an awesome sign,
an event long in the future, late to come to birth
but the fame of that great work will never die.
As the snake devoured the sparrow with her brood,
eight and the mother made the ninth, she'd borne them all,
so we will fight in Troy that many years and then,
then in the tenth we'll take her broad streets.'
So that day the prophet revealed the future-
and now, look, by god, it all comes to passl
Up with you, all you Argives geared for combat,
stand your ground, right here,
until we take the mighty walls of Priam!"
He fired them so
the armies roared and the ships resounded round them,
shattering echoes ringing from their shouts
as Argives cried assent to King Odysseus' words.
And Nestor the noble horseman spurred them more:
"What disgrace! Look at you, carrying on
in the armies' muster just like boys-fools!
Not a thought in your heads for works of battle.
What becomes of them now, the pacts and oaths we swore?
Into the flames with councils, all the plans of men,
the vows sealed with the strong, unmixed wine,
the firm clasp of the right hand we trusted!
We battle on in words, as always, mere words,
and what's the cure? We cannot find a thing.
No matter how many years we wrangle here.
Agamemnon-
never swerve, hold to your first plan of action,
lead your armies headlong into war!
The rest of them? Let them rot, the one or two
who hatch their plans apart from all the troops-
what good can they win from that? Nothing at all.
Why, they'd scuttle home before they can even learn_
if the vows of Zeus with his dark cloudy shield
are false or not. Zeus the son of almighty Cronus,
I remind you, bowed his head that day we boarded ship,
all the Argives laden with blood and death for Troy-
his lightning bolts on the right, good omens blazing forth.
So now let no man hurry to sail for home, not yet ...
not till he beds down with a faithful Trojan wife,
payment in full for the groans and shocks of war
we have all borne for Helen.
But any soldier
wild with desire to reach his home at once-
just let him lay a hand on his black benched ship
and right in front of the rest he'll reach his death!
But you, my King, be on your guard yourself. Come,
listen well to another man. Here's some advice,
not to be tossed aside, and I will tell it clearly.
Range your men by tribes, even by clans, Agamemnon,
so clan fights by the side of clan, tribe by tribe.
Fight this way, if the Argives still obey you,
then you can see which captain is a coward,
which contingent too, and which is loyal, brave,
since they will fight in separate formations of their own.
Then, what's more, if you fail to sack the city,
you will know if the will of god's to blame
or the cowardice of your men :inept in battle."

 

  And King Agamemnon took his lead, saluting:
"Again, old man, you outfight the Argives in debate!
Father Zeus, Athena, Apollo, if only I had ten men
like Nestor to plan with me among Achaea's armies-
then we could topple Priam's citadel in a day,
throttle it in our hands and gut Troy to nothing.
But Cronus' son, Zeus with his shield of storm
insists on embroiling me in painful struggles,
futile wars of words ...
Imagine-I and Achilles, wrangling over a girl,
battling man-to-man. And I, I was the first
to let my anger flare. Ah if the two of us
could ever think as one, Troy could delay
her day of death no longer, not one moment.
Go now, take your meal-the sooner to bring on war.
Quickly-let each fighter sharpen his spear well,
balance his shield well, feed his horses well
with plenty of grain to build their racing speed-
each man look well to his chariot's running order,
nerve himself for combat now, so all day long
we can last out the grueling duels of Ares!
No breathing space, no letup, not a moment, not
till the night comes on to part the fighters' fury!
Now sweat will soak the shield-strap round your chest,
your fist gripping the spear will ache with tensing,
now the lather will drench your war-team's flanks,
hauling your sturdy chariot.
But any man I catch,
trying to skulk behind his long beaked ships,
hanging back from battle-he is finished.
No way for him to escape the dogs and birds!"
So he commanded
and the armies gave a deep resounding roar like waves
crashing against a cliff when the South Wind whips it,
bearing down, some craggy headland jutting out to sea-
the waves will never leave it in peace, thrashed by gales
that hit from every quarter, breakers left and right.
The troops sprang up, scattered back to the ships,
lit fires beside their tents and took their meal.
Each sacrificed to one or another deathless god,
each man praying to flee death and the grind of war.
But the lord of men Agamemnon sacrificed a fat rich ox,
five years old, to the son of mighty Cronus, Zeus,
and called the chiefs of all the Argive forces:
Nestor first and foremost, then King Idomeneus,
the Great and Little Ajax, Tydeus' son Diomedes
and Odysseus sixth, a mastermind like Zeus.
The lord of the war cry Menelaus came uncalled,
he knew at heart what weighed his brother down.
They stood in a ring around the ox, took up barley
and then, rising among them, King Agamemnon
raised his voice in prayer: "Zeus, Zeus,
god of greatness, god of glory, lord god
of the dark clouds who lives in the bright sky,
don't let the sun go down or the night descend on us!
Not till I hurl the smoke-black halls of Priam headlong-
torch his gates to blazing rubble-rip the tunic of Hector
and slash his heroic chest to ribbons with my bronze-
and a ruck of comrades round him, groveling facedown,
gnaw their own earth!"
And so Agamemnon prayed
but the son of Cronus would not bring his prayer to pass,
not yet ... the Father accepted the sacrifices, true,
but doubled the weight of thankless, ruthless war.
Once the men had prayed and flung the barley,
first they lifted back the heads of the victims,
slit their throats, skinned them and carved away
the meat from the thighbones and wrapped them in fat,
a double fold sliced clean and topped with strips of flesh.
And they burned these on a cleft stick, peeled and dry,
spitted the vitals, held them over Hephaestus' flames
and once they'd charred the thighs and tasted the organs
they cut the rest into pieces, pierced them with spits,
roasted them to a turn and pulled them off the fire.
The work done, the feast laid out, they ate well
and no man's hunger lacked a share of the banquet.
When they had put aside desire for food and drink,
Nestor the noble old horseman spoke out first:
"Marshal Atrides, lord of men Agamemnon,
no more trading speeches now. No more delay,
putting off the work the god puts in our hands.
Come, let the heralds cry out to all contingents,
full battle-armor, muster the men along the ships.
Now down we go, united-review them as we pass.
Down through the vast encampment of Achaea,
the faster to rouse the slashing god of war!"

 

  Agamemnon the lord of men did not resist.
He commanded heralds to cry out loud and clear
and summon the long-haired Achaean troops to battle.
Their cries rang out. The battalions gathered quickly.
The warlords dear to the gods and flanking Agamemnon
strode on ahead, marshaling men-at-arms in files,
and down their ranks the fiery-eyed Athena bore
her awesome shield of storm, ageless, deathless--
a hundred golden tassels, all of them braided tight
and each worth a hundred oxen, float along the front.
Her shield of lightning dazzling, swirling around her,
headlong on Athena swept through the Argive armies,
driving soldiers harder, lashing the fighting-fury
in each Achaean's heart-no stopping them now,
mad for war and struggle. Now, suddenly,
battle thrilled them more than the journey home,
than sailing hollow ships to their dear native land.

 

  As ravening fire rips through big stands of timber
high on a mountain ridge and the blaze flares miles away,
so from the marching troops the blaze of bronze armor,
splendid and superhuman, flared across the earth,
flashing into the air to hit the skies.
Armies gathering now
as the huge flocks on flocks of winging birds, geese or cranes
or swans with their long lancing necks-circling Asian marshes
round the Cayster outflow, wheeling in all directions,
glorying in their wings-keep on landing, advancing,
wave on shrieking wave and the tidal flats resound.
So tribe on tribe, pouring out of the ships and shelters,
marched across the Scamander plain and the earth shook,
tremendous thunder from under trampling men and horses
drawing into position down the Scamander meadow flats
breaking into flower-men by the thousands, numberless
as the leaves and spears that flower forth in spring.

 

  The armies massing . . . crowding thick-and-fast
as the swarms of flies seething over the shepherds' stalls
in the first spring days when the buckets flood with milk
so many long-haired Achaeans swarmed across the plain
to confront the Trojans, fired to smash their lines.

 

  The armies grouping now—as seasoned goatherds
split their wide-ranging flocks into packs with ease
when herds have mixed together down the pasture:
so the captains formed their tight platoons,
detaching right and left, moving up for action-
and there in the midst strode powerful Agamemnon,
eyes and head like Zeus who loves the lightning,
great in the girth like Ares, god of battles,
broad through the chest like sea lord Poseidon.
Like a bull rising head and shoulders over the herds,
a rbyal bull rearing over his flocks of driven cattle-
so imposing was Atreus' son, so Zeus made him that day,
towering over fighters, looming over armies.

 

  Sing to me now, you Muses who hold the halls of Olympus!
You are goddesses, you are everywhere, you know all things-
all we hear is the distant ring of glory, we know nothing-
who were the captains of Achaea? Who were the kings?
The mass of troops I could never tally, never name,
not even if I had ten tongues and ten mouths,
a tireless voice and the heart inside me bronze,
never unless you Muses of Olympus, daughters of Zeus
whose shield is rolling thunder, sing, sing in memory
all who gathered under Troy. Now I can only tell
the lords of the ships, the ships in all their numbers!

 

  First came the Boeotian units led by Leitus and Peneleos:
Arcesilaus and Prothoenor and Clonius shared command
of the armed men who lived in Hyria, rocky Aulis,
Schoenus, Scolus and Eteonus spurred with hills,
Thespia and Graea, the dancing rings of Mycalessus,
men who lived round Harma, Ilesion and Erythrae
and those who settled Eleon, Hyle and Peteon,
Ocalea, Medeon's fortress walled and strong,
Copae, Eutresis and Thisbe thronged with doves,
fighters from Coronea, Haliartus deep in meadows,
and the men who held Plataea and lived in Glisas,
men who held the rough-hewn gates of Lower Thebes,
Onchestus the holy, Poseidon's sun-filled grove,
men from the town of Ame green with vineyards,
Midea and sacred Nisa, Anthedon-on-the-marches.
Fifty ships came freighted with these contingents,
one hundred and twenty young Boeotians manning each.

 

  Then men who lived in Aspledon, Orchomenos of the Minyans,
fighters led by Ascalaphus and lalmenus, sons of Ares
whom Astyoche bore in Actor son of Azeus' halls
when the shy young girl, climbing into the upper rooms,
made love with the god of war in secret, shared his strength.
In her two sons' command sailed thirty long curved ships.

 

  Then Schedius and Epistrophus led the men of Phocis-
two sons of Iphitus, that great heart, Naubolus' son-
the men who held Cyparissus and Pytho's high crags,
the hallowed earth of Crisa, Daulis and Panopeus,
men who dwelled round Anemoria, round Hyampolis,
men who lived along the Cephisus' glinting waters,
men who held Lilaea close to the river's wellsprings.
Laden with all their ranks came forty long black ships
and Phocian captains ranged them column by column,
manning stations along the Boeotians' left flank.

 

  Next the Locrians led by racing Ajax, son of Oileus,
Little Ajax-a far cry from the size of Telamonian Ajax-
a smaller man but trim in his skintight linen corslet,
he outthrew all Hellenes, all Achaeans with his spear.
He led the men who lived in Opois, Cynus, Calliarus,
Bessa and Scarphe, the delightful town of Augeae,
Tarphe, and Thronion down the Boagrius River.
In Oilean Ajax' charge came forty long black ships,
Locrians living across the straits from sacrosanct Euboea.

 

  And the men who held Euboea, Abantes breathing fury,
Chalcis and Eretria, Histiaea covered with vineyards,
Cerinthus along the shore and Dion's hilltop streets,
the men who held Carystus and men who settled Styra.
Elephenor, comrade of Ares, led the whole contingent,
Chalcodon's son, a lord of the fierce Abantes.
The sprinting Abantes followed hard at his heels,
their forelocks cropped, hair grown long at the back,
troops nerved to lunge with their tough ashen spears
and slash the enemies' breastplates round their chests.
In Elephenor's command sailed forty long black ships.

 

  Next the men who held the strong-built city of Athens,
realm of high-hearted Erechtheus. Zeus's daughter Athena
tended him once the grain-giving fields had borne him,
long ago, and then she settled the king in Athens,
in her own rich shrine, where sons of Athens worship him
with bulls and goats as the years wheel round in season.
Athenians all, and Peteos' son Menestheus led them on,
and no one born on the earth could match that man
in arraying teams of horse and shielded fighters-
Nestor his only rival, thanks to Nestor's age.
And in his command sailed fifty long black ships.

 

  Out of Salamis Great Telamonian Ajax led twelve ships
drawn up where Athenian forces formed their line of battle.

 

  Then men of Argos and Tiryns with her tremendous walls
and Hermione and Asine commanding the deep wide gulf,
Troezen, Eionae and Epidaurus green with vines
and Achaea's warrior sons who held Aegina and Mases-
Diomedes lord of the war cry led their crack contingents
flanked by Sthenelus, far-famed Capaneus' favorite son.
Third in the vanguard marched Euryalus strong as a god,
son of King Mecisteus son of Talaus, but over them all,
with cries to marshal men Diomedes led the whole force
and his Argives sailed in eighty long black ships.

 

  Next the men who held Mycenae's huge walled citadel,
Corinth in all her wealth and sturdy, strong Cleonae,
men of Orniae, lovely Araethyrea and Sicyon,
Adrastus' domain before he ruled Mycenae,
men of Hyperesia, Gonoessa perched on hills,
men who held Pellene and those who circled Aegion,
men of the coastal strip and Helice's broad headland.
They came in a hundred ships and Agamemnon led them on,
Atreus' royal son, and marching in his companies
came the most and bravest fighting men by far.
And there ii the midst, armed in gleaming bronze,
in all his glory, he towered high over all his fighters-
he was the greatest warlord, he led by far the largest army.

 

  Next those who held Lacedaemon's hollows deep with gorges,
Pharis, Sparta and Messe, crowded haunt of the wild doves,
men who lived in Brysiae and Augeae's gracious country,
men who held Amyclae, Helos the seaboard fortress,
men who settled Laas and lived near Oetylus:
Agamemnon's brother, Menelaus lord of the war cry
led their sixty ships, armed them apart, downshore,
and amidst their ranks he marched, ablaze with valor,
priming men for attack. And his own heart blazed the most
to avenge the groans and shocks of war they'd borne for Helen.

 

  Next the men who lived in Pylos and handsome Arene,
Thryon, the Alpheus ford and finely-masoned Aepy,
men who lived in Cyparisseis and Amphigenia,
Pteleos, Helos and Dorion where the Muses met
the Thracian Thamyris, stopped the minstrel's song.
From Oechalia he came, from Oechalia's King Eurytus,
boasting to high heaven that he could outsing the very Muses,
the daughters of Zeus whose shield resounds with thunder.
They were enraged, they maimed him, they ripped away
his voice, the rousing immortal wonder of his song
and wiped all arts of harping from his mind.
Nestor the noble old horseman led those troops
in ninety sweeping ships lined up along the shore.

 

  And those who held Arcadia under Cyllene's peak,
near Aepytus' ancient tomb where men fight hand-to-hand,
men who lived in Pheneos and Orchomenos rife with sheep,
Stratia, Rhipe and Enispe whipped by the sudden winds,,
men who settled Tegea, Mantinea's inviting country,
men who held Stymphalus, men who ruled Parrhasia-
the son of Ancaeus led them, powerful Agapenor
with sixty ships in all, and aboard each vessel
crowded full Arcadian companies skilled in war.
Agamemnon himself, the lord of men had given them
those well-benched ships to plow the wine-dark sea,
since works of the sea meant nothing to those landsmen.

 

  Then the men who lived in Buprasion, brilliant Elis,
all the realm as far as Hyrmine and Myrsinus, frontier towns
and Olenian Rock and Alesion bound within their borders.
Four warlords led their ranks, ten-ship flotillas each,
and filling the decks came bands of Epean fighters,
two companies under Thalpius and Amphimachus, sons
of the line of Actor, one of Eurytus, one of Cteatus.
Strong Diores the son of Amarynceus led the third
and the princely Polyxinus led the fourth,
the son of King Agasthenes, Augeas' noble stock.

 

  Then ocean men from Dulichion and the Holy Islands,
the Echinades rising over the sea across from Elis-
Meges a match for Ares led their troops to war,
a son of the rider Phyleus dear to Zeus who once,
enraged at his father, fled and settled Dulichion.
In his son's command sailed forty long black ships.

 

  Next Odysseus led his Cephallenian companies,
gallant-hearted fighters, the island men of Ithaca,
of Mount Neriton's leafy ridges shimmering in the wind,
and men who lived in Crocylia and rugged Aegilips,
men who held Zacynthus and men who dwelled near Samos
and mainland men who grazed their flocks across the channel.
That mastermind like Zeus, Odysseus led those fighters on.
In his command sailed twelve ships, prows flashing crimson.

 

  And Thoas son of Andraemon led Aetolia's units,
soldiers who lived in Pleuron, Pylene and Olenus,
Chalcis along the shore and Calydon's rocky heights
where the sons of wellbom Oeneus were no more
and the king himself was dead
and Meleager with his golden hair was gone.
So the rule of all Aetolian men had passed to Thoas.
In Thoas' command sailed forty long black ships.

 

  And the great spearman Idomeneus led his Cretans,
the men who held Cnossos and Gortyn ringed in walls,
Lyctos, Miletus, Lycastus' bright chalk bluffs,
Phaestos and Rhytion, cities a joy to live in-
the men who peopled Crete, a hundred cities strong.
The renowned spearman Idomeneus led them all in force
with Meriones who butchered men like the god of war himself.
And in their command sailed eighty long black ships.

 

  And Heracles' son Tlepolemus tall and staunch
led nine ships of the proud Rhodians out of Rhodes,
the men who lived on Rhodes in three island divisions,
Lindos and Ialysus and Camirus' white escarpment,
armies led by the famous spearman Tlepolemus
whom Astyochea bore to Heracles filled with power.
He swept her up from Ephyra, from the Selleis River
after he'd ravaged many towns of brave young warlords
bred by the gods. But soon as his son Tlepolemus
came of age in Heracles' well-built palace walls
the youngster abruptly killed his father's uncle-
the good soldier Licymnius, already up in years-
and quickly fitting ships, gathering partisans,
he fled across the sea with threats of the sons
and the sons' sons of Heracles breaking at his back.
But he reached Rhodes at last, a wanderer rocked by storms,
and there they settled in three divisions, all by tribes,
loved by Zeus himself the king of gods and mortals
showering wondrous gold on all their heads.

 

  Nireus led his three trim ships from Syme,
Nireus the son of Aglaea and King Charopus,
Nireus the handsomest man who ever came to Troy,
of all the Achaeans after Peleus' fearless son.
But he was a lightweight, trailed by a tiny band.

 

  And men who held Nisyrus, Casus and Crapathus,
Cos, Eurypylus' town, and the islands called Calydnae—
combat troops, and Antiphus and Phidippus led them on,
the two sons of the warlord Thessalus, Heracles' son.
In their command sailed thirty long curved ships.
And now, Muse,
sing all those fighting men who lived in Pelasgian Argos,
the big contingents out of Alus and Alope and Trachis,
men of Phthia and Hellas where the women are a wonder,
all the fighters called Achaeans, Hellenes and Myrmidons
ranked in fifty ships, and Achilles was their leader.
But they had no lust for the grind of battle now—
where was the man who marched their lines to war?
The brilliant runner Achilles lay among his ships,
raging over Briseis, the girl with lustrous hair,
the prize he seized from Lymessus—
after he had fought to exhaustion at Lymessus,
storming the heights, and breached the walls of Thebes
and toppled the vaunting spearmen Epistrophus and Mynes,
sons of King Euenus, Selepius' son. All for Briseis
his heart was breaking now . . . Achilles lay there now
but he would soon rise up in all his power.

 

  Then men of Phylace, Pyrasu's banked in flowers,
Demeter's closed and holy grove and Iton mother of flocks,
Antron along the shore and Pteleos deep in meadows.
The veteran Protesilaus had led those troops
while he still lived, but now for many years
the arms of the black earth had held him fast
and his wife was left behind, alone in Phylace,
both cheeks torn in grief, their house half-built.
Just as he vaulted off his ship a Dardan killed him,
first by far of the Argives slaughtered on the beaches.
But not even then were his men without a captain,
yearn as they did for their lost leader. No,
Podarces a fresh campaigner ranged their units-
a son of Iphiclus son of Phylacus rich in flocks-
Podarces, gallant Protesilaus' blood brother,
younger-born, but the older man proved braver too,
an iron man of war. Yet not for a moment did his army
lack a leader, yearn as they did for the braver dead.
Under Podarces sailed their forty long black ships.

 

And the men who lived in Pherae fronting Lake Boebeis,
in Boebe and Glaphyrae and lolcos' sturdy ramparts:
their eleven ships were led by Admetus' favored son,
Eumelus, born to Admetus by Alcestis, queen of women,
the most radiant daughter Pelias ever fathered.

 

  Then men who lived in Methone and Thaumacia,
men who held Meliboea and rugged ridged Olizon:
Philoctetes the master archer had led them on
in seven ships with fifty oarsmen aboard each,
superbly skilled with the bow in lethal combat.
But their captain lay on an island, racked with pain,
on Lemnos' holy shores where the armies had marooned him,
agonized by his wound, the bite of a deadly water-viper.
There he writhed in pain but soon, encamped by the ships,
the Argives would recall Philoctetes, their great king.
But not even then were his men without a captain,
yearn as they did for their lost leader. No,
Medon formed them up, Oileus' bastard son
whom Rhene bore to Oileus, grim raider of cities.

 

  And men who settled Tricca, rocky Ithome terraced high
and men who held Oechalia, Oechalian Eurytus' city:
the two sons of Asclepius led their units now,
both skilled healers, Podalirius and Machaon.
In their command sailed forty curved black ships.

 

  And men who held Ormenion and the Hyperian Spring,
men who held Asterion, Titanos' chalk-white cliffs:
Eurypylus marched them on, Euaemon's shining son.
In his command sailed forty long black ships.

 

  And the men who settled Argissa and Gyrtone,
Orthe, Elone, the gleaming citadel Oloosson:
Polypoetes braced for battle led them on,
the son of Pirithous, son of deathless Zeus.
Famous Hippodamia bore the warrior to Pirithous
that day he wreaked revenge on the shaggy Centaurs,
routed them out of Pelion, drove them to the Aethices.
Polypoetes was not alone, Leonteus shared the helm,
companion of Ares, Caeneus' grandson, proud Coronus' son.
And in his command sailed forty long black ships.

 

  And Guneus out of Cyphus led on two and twenty ships
and in his platoons came Enienes and battle-tried Peraebians
who pitched homes in the teeth of Dodona's bitter winters,
who held the tilled acres along the lovely Titaressus
that runs her pure crystal currents into Peneus-
never mixed with Peneus' eddies glistening silt
but gliding over the surface smooth as olive oil,
branching, breaking away from the river Styx,
the dark and terrible oath-stream of the gods.

 

  And Prothous son of Tenthredon led the Magnesians,
men who lived around the Peneus, up along Mount Pelion
sloped in wind-whipped leaves. Racing Prothous led them on
and in his command sailed forty long black ships.

 

  These, these were the captains of Achaea and the kings.
Now tell me, Muse, who were the bravest of them all,
of the men and chariot-teams that came with Atreus' sons?

 

  The best by far of the teams were Eumelus' mares
and Pheres' grandson drove them—swift as birds,
matched in age and their glossy coats and matched
to a builder's level flat across their backs.
Phoebus Apollo lord of the silver bow
had bred them both in Perea, a brace of mares
that raced the War-god's panic through the lines.
But best by far of the men was Telamonian Ajax

 

while Achilles raged apart. The famed Achilles
towered over them all, he and the battle-team
that bore the peerless son of Peleus into war.
But off in his beaked seagoing ships he lay,
raging away at Atrides Agamemnon, king of armies,
while his men sported along the surf, marking time,
hurling the discus, throwing spears and testing bows.
And the horses, each beside its chariot, champing clover
and parsley from the marshes, waited, pawing idly.
Their masters' chariots stood under blankets now,
stored away in the tents while the rank and file,
yearning for their leader, the great man of war,
drifting here and there throughout the encampment,
hung back from the fighting.
But on the armies came
as if the whole earth were devoured by wildfire, yes,
and the ground thundered under them, deep as it does
for Zeus who loves the lightning, Zeus in all his rage
when he lashes the ground around Typhoeus in Arima,
there where they say the monster makes his bed of pain-
so the earth thundered under their feet, armies trampling,
sweeping through the plain at blazing speed.
Now the Trojans.
Iris the wind-quick messenger hurried down to Ilium,
bearing her painful message, sent by storming Zeus.
The Trojans assembled hard by Priam's gates,
gathered together there, young men and old,
and rushing closer, racing Iris addressed them,
keying her voice to that of Priam's son Polites.
He had kept a watch for the Trojans, posted atop
old Aesyetes' tomb and poised to sprint for home
at the first sign of Argives charging from the ships.
Like him to the life, the racing Iris urged, "Old Priam,
words, endless words-that is your passion, always,
as once in the days of peace. But ceaseless war's upon us!
Time and again I've gone to battle, fought with men
but I've never seen an army great as this. Too much-
like piling leaves or sand, and on and on they come,
advancing across the plain to fight before our gates.
Hector, I urge you first of all-do as I tell you.
Armies of allies crowd the mighty city of Priam,
true, but they speak a thousand different tongues,
fighters gathered here from all ends of the realm.
Let each chief give commands to the tribe he leads,
move them out, marshal his own contingents—now!"

 

  Hector missed nothing-that was a goddess' call.
He broke up the assembly at once. They rushed to arms
and all the gates flung wide and the Trojan mass surged out,
horses, chariots, men on foot-a tremendous roar went up.

 

  Now a sharp ridge rises out in front of Troy,
all on its own and far across the plain
with running-room around it, all sides clear.
Men call it Thicket Ridge, the immortals call it
the leaping Amazon Myrine's mounded tomb, and there
the Trojans and allies ranged their troops for battle.

 

  First, tall Hector with helmet flashing led the Trojans-
Priam's son and in his command by far the greatest, bravest army,
divisions harnessed in armor, veterans bristling spears.

 

  And the noble son of Anchises led the Dardanians-
Aeneas whom the radiant Aphrodite bore Anchises
down the folds of Ida, a goddess bedded with a man.
Not Aeneas alone but flanked by Antenor's two sons,
Acamas and Archelochus, trained for every foray.

 

  And men who lived in Zelea under the foot of Ida,
a wealthy clan that drank the Aesepus' dark waters—
Trojans all, and the shining son of Lycaon led them on,
Pandarus, with the bow that came from Apollo's own hands.

 

  And the men who held the land of Apaesus and Adrestia,
men who held Pityea, Terea's steep peaks—the units led
by Adrestus joined by Amphius trim in linen corslet,
the two good sons of Merops out of Percote harbor,
Merops adept beyond all men in the mantic arts.
He refused to let his two boys march to war,
this man-killing war, but the young ones fought him
all the way-the forces of black death drove them on.

 

  And the men who lived around Percote and Practios,
men who settled Sestos, Abydos and gleaming Arisbe:
Asius son of Hyrtacus led them on, captain of armies,
Hyrtacus' offspring Asius-hulking, fiery stallions
bore him in from Arisbe, from the Selleis River.

 

  Hippothous led the Pelasgian tribes of spearmen,
fighters who worked Larissa's dark rich plowland.
Hippothous and Pylaeus, tested soldier, led them on,
both sons of Pelasgian Lethus, Teutamus' scion.

 

  Acamas and the old hero Pirous led the Thracians,
all the Hellespont bounds within her riptide straits.

 

  Euphemus led the Cicones, fighters armed with spears,
son of Troezenus, Ceas' son, a warlord bred by the gods.

 

  Pyraechmes led the Paeonians, reflex bows in hand,  960
hailing from Amydon far west and the broad river Axius,
Axius, clearest stream that flows across the earth.

 

  That burly heart Pylaemenes led his Paphlagonians
out of Enetian country, land where the wild mules breed:
the men who held Cytorus and lived in range of Sesamus,
building their storied halls along the Parthenius River,
at Cromna, Aegialus and the highland fortress Erythini.

 

  Odius and Epistrophus led the Halizonians out of Alybe
miles east where the mother lode of silver came to birth.

 

  Chromis led the Mysian men with Ennomus seer of birds-
but none of his winged signs could beat off black death.
Down he went, crushed by racing Achilles' hands, destroyed
in the river where he slaughtered other Trojans too.

 

  Ascanius strong as a god and Phorcys led the Phrygians
in from Ascania due east, primed for the clash of combat.

 

  Mesthles and Antiphus led Maeonia's proud contingent,
Talaemenes' two sons sprung from the nymph of Gyge Lake
led on Maeonian units born and bred under Mount Tmolus.

 

  Nastes led the Carians wild with barbarous tongues,
men who held Miletus, Phthires' ridges thick with timber,
Maeander's currents and Mount Mycale's craggy peaks.
Amphimachus and Nastes led their formations on,
Nastes and Amphimachus, Nomion's flamboyant sons.
Nastes strolled to battle decked in gold like a girl,
the fool! None of his trappings kept off grisly death-
down he went, crushed by racing Achilles' hands, destroyed
at the ford where battle-hard Achilles stripped his gold away.

 

  And last, Sarpedon and valiant Glaucus marched the Lycians on
from Lycia far south, from the Xanthus' swirling rapids.

Now with the squadrons marshaled, captains leading each,
the Trojans came with cries and the din of war like wildfowl
when the long hoarse cries of cranes sweep on against the sky
and the great formations flee from winter's grim ungodly storms,
flying in force, shrieking south to the Ocean gulfs, speeding
blood and death to the Pygmy warriors, launching at daybreak
savage battle down upon their heads. But Achaea's armies
came on strong in silence, breathing combat-fury,
hearts ablaze to defend each other to the death.

 

  When the South Wind showers mist on the mountaintops,
no friend to shepherds, better than night to thieves-
you can see no farther than you can fling a stone-
so dust came clouding, swirling up from the feet of armies
marching at top speed, trampling through the plain.

 

  Now closer, closing, front to front in the onset
till Paris sprang from the Trojan forward ranks,
a challenger, lithe, magnificent as a god,
the skin of a leopard slung across his shoulders,
a reflex bow at his back and battle-sword at hip
and brandishing two sharp spears tipped in bronze
he strode forth, challenging all the Argive best
to fight him face-to-face in mortal combat.

 

  Soon as the warrior Menelaus marked him,
Paris parading there with his big loping strides,
flaunting before the troops, Atrides thrilled
like a lion lighting on some handsome carcass,
lucky to find an antlered stag or wild goat
just as hunger strikes-he rips it, bolts it down,
even with running dogs and lusty hunters rushing him.
So Menelaus thrilled at heart-princely Paris there,
right before his eyes. The outlaw, the adulterer ...
"Now for revenge!" he thought, and down he leapt
from his chariot fully armed and hit the ground.

 

  But soon as magnificent Paris marked Atrides
shining among the champions, Paris' spirit shook.
Backing into his friendly ranks, he cringed from death
as one who trips on a snake in a hilltop hollow
recoils, suddenly, trembling grips his knees
and pallor takes his cheeks and back he shrinks.
So he dissolved again in the proud Trojan lines,
dreading Atrides-magnificent, brave Paris.
At one glance
Hector raked his brother with insults, stinging taunts:
"Paris, appalling Paris! Our prince of beauty-
mad for women, you lure them all to ruin!
Would to god you'd never been born, died unwed.
That's all I'd ask. Better that way by far
than to have you strutting here, an outrage-
a mockery in the eyes of all our enemies. Why,
the long-haired Achaeans must be roaring with laughter!
They thought you the bravest champion we could field,
and just because of the handsome luster on your limbs,
but you have no pith, no fighting strength inside you.
What?-is this the man who mustered the oarsmen once,
who braved the seas in his racing deep-sea ships,
trafficked with outlanders, carried off a woman
far from her distant shores, a great beauty
wed to a land of rugged spearmen?
You...
curse to your father, your city and all your people,
a joy to our enemies, rank disgrace to yourselfl
So, you can't stand up to the battling Menelaus?
You'd soon feel his force, that man you robbed
of his sumptuous, warm wife. No use to you then,
the fine lyre and these, these gifts of Aphrodite,
your long flowing locks and your striking looks,
not when you roll and couple with the dust.
What cowards, the men of Troy-or years ago
they'd have decked you out in a suit of rocky armor,
stoned you to death for all the wrongs you've done!"

 

  And Paris, magnificent as a god, replied,
"Ah Hector, you criticize me fairly, yes,
nothing unfair, beyond what I deserve.
The heart inside you is always tempered hard,
like an ax that goes through wood when a shipwright
cuts out ship timbers with every ounce of skill
and the blade's weight drives the man's stroke.
So the heart inside your chest is never daunted.
Still, don't fling in my face the lovely gifts
of golden Aphrodite. Not to be tossed aside,
the gifts of the gods, those glories ...
whatever the, gods give of their own free will-
how could we ever choose them for ourselves?
Now, though,
if you really want me to fight to the finish here,
have all Trojans and Argives take their seats
and pit me against Menelaus dear to Ares-
right between the lines-
we'll fight it out for Helen and all her wealth.
And the one who proves the better man and wins,
he'll take those treasures fairly, lead the woman home.
The rest will seal in blood their binding pacts of friendship.
Our people will live in peace on the rich soil of Troy,
our enemies sail home to the stallion-land of Argos,
the land of Achaea where the women are a wonder. .."

 

  When Hector heard that challenge he rejoiced
and right in the no man's land along his lines he strode,
gripping his spear mid-haft, staving men to a standstill.
But the long-haired Argive archers aimed at Hector,
trying to cut him down with arrows, hurling rocks
till King Agamemnon cried out in a ringing voice,
"Hold back, Argives! Sons of Achaea, stop your salvos!
Look, Hector with that flashing helmet of his—
the man is trying to tell us something now.

 

  They held their attack. Quickly men fell silent
and Hector pleaded, appealing to both armed camps:
"Hear me—Trojans, Achaeans geared for combat!
Hear the challenge of Paris,
the man who caused our long hard campaign.
He urges all the Trojans, all the Argives too,
to lay their fine armor down on the fertile earth
while Paris himself and the warrior Menelaus
take the field between you and fight it out
for Helen and all her wealth in single combat.
And the one who proves the better man and wins,
he'll take those treasures fairly, lead the woman home.
The rest will seal in blood their binding pacts of friendship."

 

  He stopped. A hushed silence held the ranks.
And Menelaus whose cry could marshal armies
urged both sides, "Now hear me out as well!
Such limited vengeance hurts me most of all-
but I intend that we will part in peace, at last,
Trojans and Achaeans. Look what heavy casualties
you have suffered just for me, my violent quarrel,
and Paris who brought it on you all. Now we'll fight-
and death to the one marked out for doom and death!
But the rest will part in peace, and soon, soon.
Bring two lambs-a white male and a black ewe
for the Sun and Earth-and we'll bring a third for Zeus.
And lead on Priam too, Priam in all his power,
so the king himself can seal our truce in blood-
his royal sons are reckless, not to be trusted:
no one must trample on the oath we swear to Zeus.
The minds of the younger men are always flighty,
but let an old man stand his ground among them,
one who can see the days behind, the days ahead-
that is the best hope for peace, for both our armies."

 

  The Achaean and Trojan forces both exulted,
hoping this would end the agonies of war.
They hauled their chariots up in ranks, at rest,
the troops dismounted and stripped away their arms
and laid them down on the earth, crowded together-
hardly a foot of plowland showed between them.
Back to the city Hector sent two heralds now
to bring the lambs at once and summon Priam
while King Agamemnon sent Talthybius off,
heading down to the ships for one more lamb.
The herald obeyed his captain's orders quickly.

 

  And now a messenger went to white-anned Helen too,
Iris, looking for all the world like Hector's sister
wed to Antenor's son, Helicaon's bride Laodice,
the loveliest daughter Priam ever bred.
And Iris came on Helen in her rooms ...
weaving a growing web, a dark red folding robe,
working into the weft the endless bloody struggles
stallion-breaking Trojans and Argives armed in bronze
had suffered all for her at the god of battle's hands.
Iris, racing the wind, brushed close and whispered,
"Come, dear girl, come quickly-
so you can see what wondrous things they're doing,
stallion-breaking Trojans and Argives armed in bronze!
A moment ago they longed to kill each, other, longed
for heartbreaking, inhuman warfare on the plain.
Now those very warriors stand at ease, in silence-
the fighting's stopped, they lean against their shields,
their long lances stuck in the ground beside them.
Think of it: Paris and Menelaus loved by Ares
go to fight it out with their rugged spears-
all for you-and the man who wins that duel,
you'll be called his wife!"
And with those words
the goddess filled her heart with yearning warm and deep
for her husband long ago, her city and her parents.
Quickly cloaking herself in shimmering linen,
out of her rooms she rushed, live tears welling,
and not alone-two of her women followed close behind,
Aethra, Pittheus' daughter, and Clymene, eyes wide,
and they soon reached the looming Scaean Gates.

 

  And there they were, gathered around Priam,
Panthous and Thymoetes, Lampus and Clytius,
Hicetaon the gray aide of Ares, then those two
with unfailing good sense, Ucalegon and Antenor.
The old men of the realm held seats above the gates.
Long years had brought their fighting days to a halt
but they were eloquent speakers still, clear as cicadas
settled on treetops, lifting their voices through the forest,
rising softly, falling, dying away ... So they waited,
the old chiefs of Troy, as they sat aloft the tower.
And catching sight of Helen moving along the ramparts,
they murmured one to another, gentle, winged words:
"Who on earth could blame them? Ah, no wonder
the men of Troy and Argives under arms have suffered
years of agony all for her, for such a woman.
Beauty, terrible beauty!
A deathless goddess-so she strikes our eyes!
But still,
ravishing as she is, let her go home in the long ships
and not be left behind ... for us and our children
down the years an irresistible sorrow."
They murmured low
but Priam, raising his voice, called across to Helen,
"Come over here, dear child. Sit in front of me,
so you can see your husband of long ago,
your kinsmen and your people.
I don't blame you. I hold the gods to blame.
They are the ones who brought this war upon me,
devastating war against the Achaeans—
Here, come closer,
tell me the name of that tremendous fighter. Look,
who's that Achaean there, so stark and grand?
Many others afield are much taller, true,
but I have never yet set eyes on one so regal,
so majestic ... That man must be a king!"

 

  And Helen the radiance of women answered Priam,
"I revere you so, dear father, dread you too—
if only death had pleased me then, grim death,
that day I followed your son to Troy, forsaking
my marriage bed, my kinsmen and my child,
my favorite, now full-grown,
and the lovely comradeship of women my own age.
Death never came, so now I can only waste away in tears.
But about your question—yes, I have the answer.
That man is Atreus' son Agamemnon, lord of empires,
both a mighty king and a strong spearman too,
and he used to be my kinsman, whore that I am!
There was a world . . . or was it all a dream?"

 

  Her voice broke but the old king, lost in wonder;
cried out, "How lucky you are, son of'Atreus,
child of fortune, your destiny so blessed!
Look at the vast Achaean armies you command!
Years ago I visited Phrygia rife with vineyards,
saw the Phrygian men with their swarming horses there-
multitudes—the armies of Otreus, Mygdon like a god,
encamped that time along the Sangarius River banks.
And I took my stand among them, comrade-in-arms
the day the Amazons struck, a match for men in war.
But not even those hordes could match these hordes of yours,
your fiery-eyed Achaeans!"
And sighting Odysseus next
the old king questioned Helen, "Come, dear child,
tell me of that one too-now who is he?
Shorter than Atreus' son Agamemnon, clearly,
but broader across the shoulders, through the chest.
There, you see? His armor's heaped on the green field
but the man keeps ranging the ranks of fighters like a ram-
yes, he looks to me like a thick-fleeced bellwether ram
making his way through a big mass of sheep-flocks,
shining silver-gray."
  Helen the child of Zeus replied,
"That's Laertes' son, the great tactician Odysseus.
He was bred in the land of Ithaca. Rocky ground
and he's quick at every treachery under the sun-
the man of twists and turns."
Helen paused
and the shrewd Antenor carried on her story:
"Straight to the point, my lady, very true.
Once in the past he came our way, King Odysseus
heading the embassy they sent for your release,
together with Menelaus dear to Ares.
I hosted them, treated them warmly in my halls
and learned the ways of both, their strategies, their traits.
Now, when they mingled with our Trojans in assembly,
standing side-by-side, Menelaus' shoulders
mounted over his friend's in height and spread,
when both were seated Odysseus looked more lordly.
But when they spun their appeals before us all,
Menelaus spoke out quickly-his words racing,
few but clear as a bell, nothing long-winded
or off the mark, though in fact the man was younger.
But when Odysseus sprang up, the famed tactician
would just stand there, staring down, hard,
his eyes fixed on the ground,
never shifting his scepter back and forth,
clutching it stiff and still like a mindless man.
You'd think him a sullen fellow or just plain fool.
But when he let loose that great voice from. his chest
and the words came piling on like a driving winter blizzard-
then no man alive could rival Odysseus! Odysseus ...
we no longer gazed in wonder at his looks."
Catching sight
of a third fighter, Ajax, the old king asked her next,
"Who's that other Achaean, so powerful, so well-built?
He towers over the Argives, his head, his massive shoulders!"

 

  And Helen in all her radiance, her long robes, replied,
"Why, that's the giant Ajax, bulwark of the Achaeans.
And Idomeneus over there-standing with his Cretans-
like a god, you see? And the Cretan captains
form a ring around him. How often Menelaus,
my good soldier, would host him in our halls,
in the old days, when he'd sail across from Crete.
And now I see them all, the fiery-eyed Achaeans,
I know them all by heart, and I could tell their names ...
but two I cannot find, and they're captains of the armies,
Castor breaker of horses and the hardy boxer Polydeuces.
My blood brothers. Mother bore them both. Perhaps
they never crossed over from Lacedaemon's lovely hills
or come they did, sailing here in the deep-sea ships,
but now they refuse to join the men in battle,
dreading the scorn, the curses hurled at me . . ."

 

  So she wavered, but the earth already held them fast,
long dead in the life-giving earth of Lacedaemon,
the dear land of their fathers.
Now through Troy
the heralds brought the offerings for the gods,
sacred victims to bind and seal the oaths:
two lambs and the wine that warms the heart,
the yield of the vine, filling a goatskin sack,
and the herald Idaeus carried a gleaming bowl
and golden winecups. Reaching the old king's side
the crier roused him sharply: "Son of Laomedon, rise up!
They are calling for you now, commanders of both armies,
stallion-breaking Trojans and Argives armed in bronze-
come down to the plain so you can seal our oaths.
Now Paris and Menelaus, Atrides loved by Ares,
will fight it out with their rugged spears for Helen,
and Helen and all her treasures go to the man who wins.
The rest will seal in blood their binding pacts of friendship.
Our people will live in peace on the rich soil of Troy.
Our enemies sail home to the stallion-land of Argos,
the land of Achaea where the women are a wonder."

 

  A shudder went shooting through the old man
but he told his men to yoke the team at once.
They promptly obeyed and Priam climbed aboard,
pulling the reins back taut. Anterior flanked him,
mounting the gleaming car, and both men drove the team
through the Scaean Gates, heading toward the plain.

 

  Reaching the front, they climbed down from the chariot,
onto the earth that feeds us all, and into the space
between Achaean and Trojan lines they marched,
Lord Agamemnon rose at once to greet them both
with the great tactician Odysseus by his side.
The noble heralds brought on the victims
marked for the gods to seal and bind the oaths.
They mixed the contenders' wine in a large bowl
and rinsed the warlords' waiting hands with water.
Atreus' son drew forth the dagger always slung
at his battle-sword's big sheath, cut some tufts
from the lambs' heads, and heralds passed them round
to Achaean and Trojan captains. Then Atreus' son
Agamemnon stood in behalf of all, lifted his arms
and prayed in his deep resounding voice, "Father Zeus!
Ruling over us all from Ida, god of greatness, god of glory
Helios, Sun above us, you who see all, hear all things!
Rivers! And Earth! And you beneath the ground
who punish the dead—whoever broke his oath-
be witness here, protect our binding pacts.
If Paris brings Menelaus down in blood,
he keeps Helen himself and all her wealth
and we sail home in our racing deep-sea ships.
But if red-haired Menelaus brings down Paris,
the Trojans surrender Helen and all her treasures.
And they pay us reparations fair and fitting,
a price to inspire generations still to come.
But if Priam and Priam's sons refuse to pay,
refuse me, Agamemnon-with Paris beaten down-
then I myself will fight it out for the ransom,
I'll battle here to the end of our long war."
On those terms
he dragged his ruthless dagger across the lambs' throats
and let them fall to the ground, dying, gasping away
their life breath, cut short by the sharp bronze.
Then dipping up the wine from the mixing bowls,
brimming their cups, pouring them on the earth,
men said their prayers to the gods who never die.
You could hear some Trojan or Achaean calling, "Zeus-
god of greatness, god of glory, all you immortals!
Whichever contenders trample on this treaty first,
spill their brains on the ground as this wine spills-
theirs, their children's too-their enemies rape their wives!"

 

  But Zeus would not fulfill their prayers, not yet ...
Now Priam rose in their midst and took his leave:
"Hear me, Trojans, Achaeans geared for combat-
home I go to windy Ilium, straight home now.
This is more than I can bear, I tell you-
to watch my son do battle with Menelaus
loved by the War-god, right before my eyes.
Zeus knows, no doubt, and every immortal too,
which fighter is doomed to end all this in death."

 

  And laying the victims in the chariot, noble Priam
climbed aboard, pulling the reins back taut.
Antenor flanked him, mounting the gleaming car,
and back they drove again, heading home to Troy.
But Priam's son Prince Hector and royal Odysseus
measured off the ground for single combat first,
then dropped two stones in a helmet, lots for casting-
who would be first to hurl his bronze-tipped spear?
The armies prayed and stretched their hands to the gods.
You could hear some Trojan or Achaean pleading, "Father Zeusl
Ruling over us all from Ida, god of greatness, gloryl
Whoever brought this war on both our countries,
let him rot and sink to the House of Death—
but let our pacts of friendship all hold fast!"
So they prayed
as tall Hector, eyes averted under his flashing helmet,
shook the two lots hard and Paris' lot leapt out.
The troops sat down by rank, each beside his horses
pawing the ground where blazoned war-gear lay. And now-
one warrior harnessed burnished armor on his back,
magnificent Paris, fair-haired Helen's consort.
First he wrapped his legs with well-made greaves,
fastened behind the heels with silver ankle-clasps,
next he strapped a breastplate round his chest,
his brother Lycaon's that fitted him so well.
Then over his shoulder Paris slung his sword,
the fine bronze blade with its silver-studded hilt,
and then the shield-strap and his sturdy, massive shield
and over his powerful head he set a well-forged helmet,
the horsehair crest atop it tossing, bristling terror,
and last he grasped a spear that matched his grip.
Following step by step
the fighting Menelaus strapped on armor too.

 

  Both men armed at opposing sides of the forces,
into the no man's land between the lines they strode,
glances menacing, wild excitement seizing all who watched,
the stallion-breaking Trojans and Argive men-at-arms.
Striking a stand in the dueling-ground just cleared
they brandished spears at each other, tense with fury.
Suddenly Paris hurled-his spear's long shadow flew
and the shaft hit Menelaus' round shield, full center-
not pounding through, the brazen point bent back
in the tough armor.
  But his turn next—Menelaus
reared with a bronze lance and a prayer to Father Zeus:
"Zeus, King, give me revenge, he wronged me first!
Illustrious Paris-crush him under my hand!
So even among the men to come a man may shrink
from wounding the host who showers him with kindness."

 

  Shaking his spear, he hurled and its long shadow flew
and the shaft hit Paris' round shield, hit full center-
straight through the gleaming hide the heavy weapon drove,
ripping down and in through the breastplate finely worked,
tearing the war-shirt, close by Paris' flank it jabbed
but the Trojan swerved aside and dodged black death.
So now Menelaus drew his sword with silver studs
and hoisting the weapon high, brought it crashing down
on the helmet ridge but the blade smashed where it struck-
jagged shatters flying-it dropped from Atrides' hand
and the hero cried out, scanning the blank skies,
"Father Zeus-no god's more deadly than you!
Here I thought I'd punish Paris for all his outrage-
now my sword is shattered, right in my hands, look,
my spear flew from my grip for nothing-I never hit him!"

 

  Lunging at Paris, he grabbed his horsehair crest,
swung him round, started to drag him into Argive lines
and now the braided chin-strap holding his helmet tight
was gouging his soft throat-Paris was choking, strangling.
Now he'd have hauled him off and won undying glory
but Aphrodite, Zeus's daughter quick to the mark,
snapped the rawhide strap, cut from a bludgeoned ox,
and the helmet came off empty in Menelaus' fist.
Whirling it round the fighter sent it flying
into his Argives scrambling fast to retrieve it-
back at his man he sprang, enraged with brazen spear,
mad for the kill but Aphrodite snatched Paris away,
easy work for a god, wrapped him in swirls of mist
and set him down in his bedroom filled with scent.
Then off she went herself to summon Helen
and found her there on the steep, jutting tower
with a troop of Trojan women clustered round her.
The goddess reached and tugged at her fragrant robe,
whispering low, for all the world like an old crone,
the old weaver who, when they lived in Lacedaemon,
wove her fine woolens and Helen held her dear.
Like her to the life, immortal Love invited,
"Quickly-Paris is calling for you, come back homel
There he is in the bedroom, the bed with inlaid rings-
he's glistening in all his beauty and his robes!
You'd never dream he's come from fighting a man,
you'd think he's off to a dance or slipped away
from the dancing, stretching out at ease."
Enticing so
that the heart in Helen's breast began to race.
She knew the goddess at once, the long lithe neck,
the smooth full breasts and the fire in those eyes-
and she was amazed, she burst out with her name:
"Maddening one, my Goddess, oh what now?
Lusting to lure me to my ruin yet again?
Where will you drive me next?
Off and away to other grand, luxurious cities,
out to Phrygia, out to Maeonia's tempting country?
Have you a favorite mortal man there too?
But why now?—
because Menelaus has beaten your handsome Paris
and hateful as I am, he longs to take me home?
Is that why you beckon here beside me now
with all the immortal cunning in your heart?
Well, go to him yourself-you hover beside him!
Abandon the gods' high road and be a mortal!
Never set foot again on Mount Olympus, never!-
suffer for Paris, protect Paris, for eternity ...
until he makes you his wedded wife-that or his slave.
Not I, I'll never go back again. It would be wrong,
disgraceful to share that coward's bed once more.
The women of Troy would scorn me down the years.
Oh the torment—never-ending heartbreak!"

 

  But Aphrodite rounded on her in fury:
"Don't provoke me-wretched, headstrong girl!
Or in my immortal rage I may just toss you over,
hate you as I adore you now-with a vengeance.
I might make you the butt of hard, withering hate
from both sides at once, Trojans and Achaeans-
then your fate can tread you down to dust!"
So she threatened
and Helen the daughter of mighty Zeus was terrified.
Shrouding herself in her glinting silver robes
she went along, in silence. None of her women
saw her go . . . The goddess led the way.

 

  And once they arrived at Paris' sumptuous halls
the attendants briskly turned to their own work
as Helen in all her radiance climbed the steps
to the bedroom under the high, vaulting roof.
There Aphrodite quickly brought her a chair,
the goddess herself with her everlasting smile,
and set it down, face-to-face with Paris.
And there Helen sat, Helen the child of Zeus
whose shield is storm and lightning, glancing away,
lashing out at her husband: "So, home from the wars!
Oh would to god you'd died there, brought down
by that great soldier, my husband long ago.
And how you used to boast, year in, year out,
that you were the better man than fighting Menelaus
in power, arm and spear! So why not go back now,
hurl your challenge at Menelaus dear to Ares,
fight it out together, man-to-man again?
Wait,
take my advice and call a halt right here:
no more battling with fiery-haired Menelaus,
pitting strength against strength in single combat-
madness. He just might impale you on his spear!"

 

  But Paris replied at once to Helen's challenge:
"No more, dear one-don't rake me with your taunts,
myself and all my courage. This time, true,
Menelaus has won the day, thanks to Athena.
I'll bring him down tomorrow.
Even we have gods who battle on our side.
But come—
let's go to bed, let's lose ourselves in love!
Never has longing for you overwhelmed me so,
no, not even then, I tell you, that first time
when I swept you up from the lovely hills of Lacedaemon,
sailed you off and away in the racing deep-sea ships
and we went and locked in love on Rocky Island ...
That was nothing to how I hunger for you now-
irresistible longing lays me low!"

 

  He led the way to bed. His wife went with him.
And now, while the two made love in the large carved bed,
Menelaus stalked like a wild beast, up and down the lines-
where could he catch a glimpse of magnificent Paris?
Not a single Trojan, none of their famous allies
could point out Paris to battle-hungry Menelaus.
Not that they would hide him out of friendship,
even if someone saw him—
all of them hated him like death, black death.
But marshal Agamemnon called out to the armies,
"Hear me now, you Trojans, Dardans, Trojan allies!
Clearly victory goes to Menelaus dear to Ares.
You must surrender Helen and all her treasures with her.
At once-and pay us reparations fair and fitting,
A price to inspire generations still to come!”

 

  So Atrides demanded. His armies roared assent.

Now aloft by the side of Zeus the gods sat in council,
conferring across Olympus' golden floor as noble Hebe
poured them rounds of nectar. They lifted golden beakers,
pledging each other warmly, gazing down on Troy ...
But abruptly Zeus was set on infuriating Hera,
courting her fire with cunning, mocking taunts: "So,
those two goddesses there are Menelaus' best defense,
Hera of Argos, Boeotian Athena, guard of armies.
Look at them—sitting apart, watching the dueling.
So they take their pleasure. But Aphrodite here
with her everlasting laughter always stands by Paris
and drives the deadly spirits from her man. Why,
just now she plucked him away, she saved his life
when he thought his end had come. Nevertheless-
clearly victory goes to Menelaus dear to Ares.
So now we plan how the war will all work out:
do we rouse the pain and grisly fighting once again
or hand down pacts of peace between both armies?
Ah if only it might prove well and good to all,
to every immortal god, men might still live on
in royal Priam's citadel. And Helen of Argos?
Menelaus just might lead her home again."
So he mocked
as Athena and Queen Hera muttered between themselves,
huddled together, plotting Troy's destruction.
True, Athena held her peace and said nothing .. .
smoldering at the Father, seized with wild resentment.
But Hera could hold the anger in her breast no longer,
suddenly bursting out, "Dread majesty, son of Cronus,
what are you saying? How can you think of making
all my labor worthless, all gone for nothing?
Mortal labor-the sweat I poured, my horses panting,
spent from launching Achaea's armies, heaping pains
on Priam and Priam's sons.
  Do as you please—
but none of the deathless gods will ever praise you."

 

  Rising in anger, Zeus who drives the storm clouds
thundered, "Insatiable Heral How great are the pains
that Priam and Priam's sons have heaped on you
that you rage on, relentless, forever bent on razing
the well-built heights of Troy? Only if you could breach
their gates and their long walls and devour Priam
and Priam's sons and the Trojan armies raw-
then you just might cure your rage at last.
Well, do as you please. But in days to come
don't let this quarrel breed some towering clash
between us both, pitting you and me in conflict.
One more thing-take it to heart, I urge you.
Whenever I am bent on tearing down some city
filled with men you love-to please myself-
never attempt to thwart my fury, Hera,
give me my way. For 1, 1 gave you this,
all of my own free will but hardly willing. No,
of all the cities under the sun and starry skies,
wherever men who walk the earth have dwelled,
I honor sacred Ilium most with my immortal heart:
Priam and men of Priam who hurls the strong ash spear.
Never once did my altar lack its share of victims,
winecups tipped and the deep smoky savor. These,
these are the gifts we claim-they are our rights."

 

  And Hera the Queen, her eyes wide, answered,
"Excellent! The three cities that I love best of all
are Argos and Sparta, Mycenae with streets as broad as Troy's.
Raze them—whenever they stir the hatred in your heart.
My cities . . . I will never rise in their defense,
not against you—I'd never grudge your pleasure.
What if I did protest, forbid you to raze their walls?
What good would protest do? You are far stronger than I.
Still, you must not make my labor come to nothing.
I am a god too. My descent the same as yours-
crooked-minded Cronus fathered me as well,
the first of all his daughters, first both ways:
both by birth and since I am called your consort
and you in turn rule all the immortal gods.
So come, let us yield to each other now
on this one point, I to you and you to me,
and the other deathless powers will fall in line.
But quickly, order Athena down to battle now,
into the killing-ground of Trojans and Achaeans—
and see that the Trojans break the sworn truce first
and trample on the Argives in their triumph!"

 

  The father of men and gods complied at once.
He winged Athena on with a flight of orders: "Quickly!
Down you go to Troy's.and Achaea's armies now-
and see that the Trojans break the sworn truce first
and trample on the Argives in their triumph."

 

  So he launched Athena already poised for action.
Down the goddess swept from Olympus' craggy peaks
and dove like a star the son of Cronus flings,
Cronus with all his turning, twisting ways-
a sign to men at sea or a massive army marching,
blazing on with a stream of sparks showering in its wake.
Like a shooting star Athena flashed across the earth,
plunging down in the midst of both camped forces.
Terror gripped the fighters looking on,
stallion-breaking Trojans, Argive men-at-arms.
One would glance at a comrade, groaning, "What next-
battle again, more pain and grisly fighting?
Or pacts between both armies? Peace from Zeus,
the great steward on high who rules our mortal wars?"

 

  As Achaeans and Trojans wondered what was coming,
Athena merged in the Trojan columns like a fighter,
like Antenor's son the rugged spearman Laodocus,
hunting for Pandarus, hoping to find the archer.
Find him she did, Lycaon's skilled, fearless son,
standing by, flanked by the bands of shielded men
who'd trooped with him from Aesepus' dark rapids.
Athena halted beside him, let her challenge fly:
"Here's glory, son of Lycaon-let me tempt you,
you with your archer's skill! Have you the daring
to wing an arrow at Menelaus? Just think what thanks,
what fame you'd win in the eyes of all the Trojans,
Prince Paris most of all. The first among all,
you'd bear off shining, priceless gifts from him.
Just let him see Menelaus, Atreus' fighting son
brought down by your shaft and hoisted onto his pyre,
mourned with grief and tears! Come, up with you,
whip an arrow at this invincible Menelaus-now!
But swear to Apollo, Wolf-god, glorious Archer,
you'll slaughter splendid victims, newborn lambs
when you march home to Zelea's sacred city."

 

  So Athena fired the fool's heart inside him.
Then and there he unstrapped his polished bow,
the horn of a wild goat he'd shot in the chest
one day as the springy ibex clambered down a cliff.
Lurking there under cover, he hit it in the heart
and the fine kill went sprawling down the rocks.
The horns on its head ran sixteen hands in length
and a bowyer good with goat-horn worked them up,
fitted, clasped them tight, sanded them smooth
and set the golden notch-rings at the tips.
Superb equipment-bending it back hard
the archer strung his bow ...
propping an end against the ground as cohorts
braced their shields in a tight wedge to hide him,
fearing bands of Argives might just leap to their feet
before he could hit Menelaus, Atreus' fighting son.
He flipped the lid of his quiver, plucked an arrow
fletched and never shot, a shaft of black pain.
Quickly notching the sharp arrow on the string
he swore to Apollo, Wolf-god, glorious Archer,
he'd slaughter splendid victims, newborn lambs
when he marched home to Zelea's sacred city.
Squeezing the nock and string together, drawing
the gut back to his nipple, iron head to the handgrip
till he flexed the great weapon back in a half-circle curve-
the bow sprang! the string sang out, arrow shot away
razor-sharp and raging to whip through Argive ranks!
But you,
Menelaus, the blessed deathless gods did not forget you,
Zeus's daughter the queen of fighters first of all.
She reared before you, skewed the tearing shaft,
flicking it off your skin as quick as a mother
flicks a fly from her baby sleeping softly.
Athena's own hand deflected it down the belt
where the gold buckles clasp and breastplates overlap.
The shaft pierced the tight belt's twisted thongs,
piercing the blazoned plates, piercing the guard
he wore to shield his loins and block the spears,
his best defense-the shaft pierced even this,
the tip of the weapon grazing the man's flesh,
and dark blood came spurting from the wound.

 

  Picture a woman dyeing ivory blood red ...
a Carian or Maeonian staining a horse's cheekpiece,
and it's stored away in a vault and troops of riders
long to sport the ornament, true, but there it lies
as a king's splendor, kept and prized twice over-
his team's adornment, his driver's pride and glory.
So now, Menelaus, the fresh blood went staining down
your sturdy thighs, your shins and well-turned ankles.

 

  The lord of men Agamemnon shuddered, frightened
to see the dark blood gushing from the wound.
And veteran Menelaus cringed himself but saw
the lashing-cords and barbs outside the gash
and his courage flooded back inside his chest.
Nevertheless, King Agamemnon, groaning heavily,
grasped Menelaus' hand and spoke out for the men
as friends around him groaned as well: "Dear brother-
that truce I sealed in blood was death for you,
setting you out alone ...
exposed before our lines to fight the Trojans-
Look how the men of Troy have laid you low,
trampling down our solemn, binding truce!
But they will never go for nothing, the oaths,
the blood of the lambs, the unmixed wine we poured,
the firm clasp of the right hand we trusted.
Never—
even if Zeus's wrath does not strike home at once,
he'll strike in his own good time with greater fury.
Transgressors will pay the price, a tremendous price,
with their own heads, their wives and all their children.
Yes, for in my heart and soul I know this well:
the day will come when sacred Troy must die,
Ptfam must die and all his people with him,
Priam who hurls the strong ash spear!
  The son of Cronus,
Zeus, throned aloft in the heavens where he lives,
Zeus himself will brandish over their heads
his black storm-shield, enraged at their deceit.
Nothing can stop it now. All this will come to pass.
But I will suffer terrible grief for you, Menelaus,
if you die now, if you fill out your destiny now-
and I go back to parching Argos in disgrace.
For the men will turn their minds toward home at once,
and we must leave Priam and all the men of Troy
a trophy to glory over, Helen, queen of Argos ...
But the plowland here will rot your bones, my brother,
as you lie dead in Troy, your mission left unfinished.
Then some Trojan will glory, swaggering, arrogant,
leaping down on the grave of famous Menelaus:
'Let Agamemnon wreak his anger so on all his foesl
Just as he led his armies here for nothing, failure.
Now home he's gone to the dear land of his fathers,
his warships empty, leaving behind the hero Menelaus
moldering in his wake!'
So some Trojan will trumpet—
let the great earth gape and take me down that day!"

 

  But the red-haired Menelaus tried to calm him:
"Courage. Don't alarm the men, not for a moment.
The point's not lodged in a mortal spot, you see?
My glittering war-belt stopped the shot in front,
my loin-piece and the plated guard below it,
gear the bronzesmiths hammered out for me."

 

  And marshal Agamemnon took his lead:
"Pray god you're right, dear brother Menelaus!
But the wound-a healer will treat it, apply drugs
and put a stop to the black waves of pain."

 

  Agamemnon turned to the sacred herald:
"Quick, Talthybius. Call Machaon here,
the son of Asclepius, that unfailing healer,
to see to Menelaus, Atreus' fighting son.
An archer's hit him, a good hand at the bow,
some Trojan or some Lycian-all glory to him,
a heavy blow to us."
The herald obeyed at once.
He ran through ranks of Achaeans armed in bronze,
searching for brave Machaon. Find him he did,
standing by, flanked by the bands of shielded men
who'd trooped with him from the stallion-land of Tricca.
He halted beside him there and let his message fly:
"Quickly, son of Asclepius, King Agamemnon calls!
Now see to Menelaus, Achaea's fighting captain.
An archer's hit him, a good hand at the bow,
some Trojan or some Lycian-all glory to him,
a heavy blow to us!"
  So the herald shouted,
stirring Machaon's spirit. Back the two men ran
through crowds of troops in Achaea's vast encampment.
And gaining the place where red-haired Menelaus
nursed his wound and a growing ring of warlords
pressed around him, striding into their midst
the godsent healer reached the captain's side
and quickly drew the shaft from his buckled belt-
he pulled it clear, the sharp barbs broke back.
He loosed the glittering belt and slipped it off
and the loin-piece and the plated guard below it,
gear the bronzesmiths made. When he saw the wound
where the tearing arrow hit, he sucked out the blood
and deftly applied the healing salves that Chiron,
friend of Asclepius, gave his father long ago.

 

  And all the while they worked over Menelaus
whose cry could marshal armies, on the Trojans came,
columns armed for assault, and again the Argives
donned their gear and roused their lust for war.

 

  King Agamemnon's hour. You would not find him asleep,
not cringing a moment, hanging back from the struggle-
he pressed for battle now where men win glory.
He left his team and burnished bronze car
with an aide, Eurymedon, Ptolemaeus PiraIdes' son
reining off to the side his snorting pair of stallions.
He gave him strict orders to keep them close at hand
for the time his knees might buckle with fatigue
from bringing crowds of soldiers into line.
Then out he went on foot to range the ranks.
The charioteers he spotted, fast with teams,
he'd halt beside and spur them on: "My Argives,
never relax your nerve, your fighting strength!
Father Zeus, I swear, will never defend the Trojans,
liars—they were the first to trample on their oaths.
So vultures will eat them raw, their firm young flesh,
and we, we'll drag their dear wives and helpless children
back to the beaked ships, once we've seized, their city!"

 

  But any men he saw retreating from hateful battle
he would lash with a sharp burst of rage: "You Argives-
glorious braggarts! Disgraces-have you no shame?
Just standing there, dumbstruck like fawns
done in from hightailing over some big meadow,
winded and teetering, heart inside them spent.
Standing there dazed, your fighting spirit dead-
what are you waiting for? You want these Trojans
to pin you against your high stems beached in the surf?
To see if Zeus will stretch his hands above your heads
and save your craven lives?"
  So the commander
ranged Achaea's ranks and brought them into line.
Moving on through the crowds he found the Cretans
arming for combat now, ringing brave Idomeneus.
Strong as a boar he urged his frontline troops
as Meriones brought the rear battalions up.
King Agamemnon, thrilled to watch them work,
was quick to salute the chief and sing his praises:
"You are the one I prize, Idomeneus, more than all
our Argive fighters fast with chariot-teams-
whether in war or action of any sort
or feasts where the ranking Argive warlords
mix their bowls with the shining wine of kings.
What if the rest of all the long-haired Achaeans
drink their measure off? Your cup stands filled, always,
brimmed like mine when the will stirs you to drink-
so now drink deep of battle. Be that fighter
you claimed to be in all the years gone by."

 

  The Cretan captain Idomeneus answered warmly,
"Trust me, Atrides—count on me, your comrade,
staunch as I swore at first, that day I bowed my head.
Now fire up the rest of your long-haired Achaeans.
On with the fighting, quickly!
The Trojans broke our binding truce just now-
death and grief to the men of Troy hereafter!
They were the first to trample on our pact."
Hearing that,
the son of Atreus strode on. Elated and making way
through crowds of troops he found the two called Ajax,
Great and Little, both captains armed for attack
with a cloud of infantry forming up behind them.
Think how a goatherd off on a mountain lookout
spots a storm cloud moving down the sea ...
bearing down beneath the rush of the West Wind
and miles away he sees it building black as pitch,
blacker, whipping the whitecaps, full hurricane fury-
the herdsman shudders to see it, drives his flocks to a cave-
so dense the battalions grouped behind the two Aeantes,
packed, massed with hardy fighters dear to the gods,
battalions black and bristling shields and spears,
fighters sweeping into the breaking storm of war.
And King Agamemnon, thrilled to see that sight,
sped them on with a rousing flight of praises:
"Ajax-Ajax! Chiefs of the Argives armed in bronze,
no orders for you-it's wrong to incite you two,
you lead your men to war in so much force.
Father Zeus, Athena, Apollo, if all my fighters
had such courage pounding inside their chests,
we'd bring King Priam's citadel crashing down
in an instant, sacked at our hands—annihilated."

 

  He spun on his heels and left them there in place,
heading for other ranks and came on Nestor next,
the clear speaker of Pylos posting troops,
readying them for action, combat units forming
under the lanky Pelagon, Alastor and Chromius,
Haemon and stocky Bias, skilled captain of armies.
Forward he ranged the charioteers with teams and cars,
backed by infantry close behind them, milling, brave men,
the defensive line of battle-that would be their role.
But the known cowards he drove amidst the center:
a man might cringe but he'd be forced to fight.
And first he gave his drivers strict commands
to rein their teams back hard and never panic,
no fouling them in the onslaught: "Let no man,
so sure of his horsemanship and soldier's prowess,
dare to fight it out alone with the Trojans,
exposed in front of his lines. No heroics now!
But give no ground-the charge will go to pieces.
And any charioteer who reaches Trojan chariots,
thrust your spear from your own car, don't throw it!
Better that way—it's tighter, stronger fighting.
So men before your time stormed walls and cities,
holding fast to that tactic, warring on with heart."

 

  The old soldier spurring his men with skills
from a lifetime spent campaigning, battles long ago.
And King Agamemnon, thrilled to see his efforts,
cheered him on with a flight of praise: "Old war-horse,
if only your knees could match the spirit in your chest
and your body's strength were planted firm as rock,
but the great leveler, age, has wom you down.
If only some other fighter had your years
and you could march with the younger, fitter men!"

 

  And Nestor the seasoned charioteer replied,
"True, Atrides, if only I were the man I was,
years ago, when I cut down rugged Ereuthalion ...
but the gods won't give us all their gifts at once.
If I was a young man then, now old age dogs my steps.
Nevertheless, I'll still troop with the horsemen,
give them maneuvers, discipline and commands:
that is the right and pride of us old men.
The young spearmen will do the work with spears.
Younger than Nestor, the next generation up,
flush with their fresh strength."
So Nestor said
and Atrides ranged forward, glad at heart,
and came on Peteos' son the charioteer
Menestheus standing idle, and circling him
Athenian men who could raise the cry of battle.
And there beside them the great tactician Odysseus,
drawn up with his Cephallenians grouped around him,
bands of them, no mean fighters, watching, waiting.
The call to action had still not reached their ears
and the columns were only just now forming, moving out,
stallion-breaking Trojans and long lines of Achaeans.
So the Cephallenians held their ground there, poised .. .
when would some other Argive unit make its charge,
engage the Trojan front and open up in battle?
Spotting them now the lord of men Agamemnon
dressed them down with a winging burst of scorn:
"You there, Peteos' son, a king, dear to the gods!
And you, the captain of craft and cunning, shrewd with greed!
Why are you cowering here, skulking out of range?
Waiting for others 'to do your fighting for you?
You-it's your duty to stand in the front ranks
and take your share of the scorching blaze of battle.
First you are, when you hear of feasts from me,
when Achaeans set out banquets for the chiefs.
Then you're happy enough to down the roast meats
and cups of honeyed, mellow wine-all you can drink.
But now you'd gladly watch ten troops of Achaeans
beat you to this feast,
first to fight with the ruthless bronze before you!"

 

  The great tactician Odysseus gave him a dark glance
and shot back at once, "Now what's this, Atrides,
this talk that slips through your clenched teeth?
How can you say I hang back from the fighting
when Argive units spur the slashing god of war
against these Trojan horsemen? Just you watch,
if you'll take the time and care to taste some action,
watch Telemachus' loving father lock and fight
with enemy champions, stallion-breaking Trojans.
You and your bluster-you are talking nonsense!"

 

 
smiled broadly and took back his taunts at once:
"Royal son of Laertes, Odysseus, great tactician,
I must not bait you so beyond the limit . . .
must not give you orders. I know for a fact
the spirit in your heart is well-disposed
to me and all my efforts. We see eye-to-eye.
Come, we'll set these things to rights later-
if any offense has passed between us now.
May the gods make all our bluster come to nothing."

 

  He left him there in place, heading for other chiefs.
And he came on Tydeus' son, impetuous Diomedes
standing by in his bolted car behind his team
with Sthenelus flanked beside him, Capaneus' son.
And spotting Tydides there, field marshal Agamemnon
gave him a winging burst of scorn: "What's this?-
you, the son of Tydeus, that skilled breaker of horses?
Why cringing here? Gazing out on the passageways of battle!
That was never Tydeus' way, shy behind the lines
he'd grapple enemies, bolting ahead of comrades.
Or so they claim who watched him at his work.
I never met the man myself, never saw him,
but they say he had no equal. True enough,
he came to Mycenae once but not at war with us-
a guest, a friend, with the royal Polynices
raising troops that time they geared to attack
the holy walls of Thebes. They pressed us hard,
they begged us to give them battle-tested allies.
My kin were glad to oblige and grant them their requests-
till Zeus changed our minds with a flash of bad omens.
So off they went, getting some distance on their way
and reached the Asopus' grassy banks and reedbeds.
From that point the men sent Tydeus on ahead,
bearing their message. He marched out at once
and came on crowds, menacing bands of Thebans
feasting away in the halls of mighty Eteocles.
There,
a total stranger, the horseman Tydeus had no fear,
alone in the midst of Theban hordes. Undaunted,
Tydeus challenged them all to tests of strength
and beat them all with ease, in each event,
Athena urged him on with so much winning force.
But the Thebans rose in anger, lashed their teams
arld packed an ambush to meet him heading back-
full fifty fighters with two chiefs in the lead,
Hunter the son of Bloodlust, strong as the gods,
and Killerman's son, the gifted cutthroat Slaughter.
But Tydeus treated them all to a shameful fate,
finished them all but let one run for home,
heeding the gods' signs he let the hunter off.
Now there was a man, that Tydeus, that Aetolian.
But he bore a son who's not the half of him in battle-
better only in wrangling, wars of words!"
Taunting so,
and steadfast Diomedes offered no reply ...
overawed by the king's majestic scorn.
But Capaneus' headstrong son lashed back in style:
"Don't lie, Atrides! You know the truth-say it!
We claim we are far, far greater than our fathers.
We are the ones who stormed the seven gates of Thebes,
heading a weaker force and facing stronger walls
but obeying the gods' signs and backed by Zeus.
Our fathers? Fools. Their own bravado killed them.
Don't tell me you rank our fathers with ourselves!"

 

  But resolute Diomedes gave him a dark glance:
"Sit down, my friend, be quiet. Listen to me.
I don't blame Agamemnon, our commander in chief,
for goading his combat-ready Argives into battle.
The glory goes to him if the Argive fighters
lay the Trojans low and take their sacred city,
but immense grief is his if comrades die in droves.
Up now, rouse our fighting-fury!"
With that challenge
he sprang from his chariot fully armed and hit the ground.
A terrific din of bronze rang from the captain's chest,
striding toward attack. Fear would have gripped
the staunchest man and made his knees give way.

 

  As a heavy surf assaults some roaring coast,
piling breaker on breaker whipped by the West Wind,
and out on the open sea a crest first rears its head
then pounds down on the shore with hoarse, rumbling thunder
and in come more shouldering crests, arching up and breaking
against some rocky spit, exploding salt foam to the skies-
so wave on wave they came, Achaean battalions ceaseless,
surging on to war. Each captain ordered his men
and the ranks moved on in silence ...
You'd never think so many troops could march
holding their voices in their chests, all silence,
fearing their chiefs who called out clear commands,
and the burnished blazoned armor round their bodies flared,
the formations trampling on.
  But not the Trojans, no . . .
like flocks of sheep in a wealthy rancher's steadings,
thousands crowding to have their white milk drained,
bleating nonstop when they hear their crying lambs-
so the shouts rose up from the long Trojan lines
and not one cry, no common voice to bind them
all together, their tongues mixed and clashed,
their men hailed from so many far-flung countries.
Ares, drove them, fiery-eyed Athena drove the Argives,
and Terror and Rout and relentless Strife stormed too,
sister of manslaughtering Ares, Ares' comrade-in-arms-
Strife, only a slight thing when she first rears her head
but her head soon hits the sky as she strides across the earth.
Now Strife hurled down the leveler Hate amidst both sides,
wading into the onslaught, flooding men with pain.

 

  At last the armies clashed at one strategic point,
they slammed their shields together, pike scraped pike
with the grappling strength of fighters armed in bronze
and their round shields pounded, boss on welded boss,
and the sound of struggle roared and rocked the earth.
Screams of men and cries of triumph breaking in one breath,
fighters killing, fighters killed, and the ground streamed blood.
Wildly as two winter torrents raging down from the mountains,
swirling into a valley, hurl their great waters together,
flash floods from the wellsprings plunging down in a gorge
and miles away in the hills a shepherd hears the thunder-
so from the grinding armies broke the cries and crash of war.

 

  Antilochus was the first to kill a Trojan captain,
tough on the front lines, Thalysias' son Echepolus.
Antilochus thrust first, speared the horsehair helmet
right at the ridge, and the bronze spearpoint lodged
in the man's forehead, smashing through his skull
and the dark came whirling down across his eyes-
he toppled down like a tower in the rough assault.
As he fell the enormous Elephenor grabbed his feet,
Chalcodon's son, lord of the brave-hearted Abantes,
dragged him out from under the spears, rushing madly
to strip his gear but his rush was short-lived.
Just as he dragged that corpse the brave Agenor
spied his ribs, bared by his shield as he bent low-
Agenor stabbed with a bronze spear and loosed his limbs,
his life spirit left him and over his dead body now
the savage work went on, Achaeans and Trojans
mauling each other there like wolves, leaping,
hurtling into each other, man throttling man.

 

  And Telamonian Ajax struck Anthemion's son,
the hardy stripling Simoisius, still unwed ...
His mother had borne him along the Simois' banks
when she trailed her parents down the slopes of Ida
to tend their flocks, and so they called him Simoisius.
But never would he repay his loving parents now
for the gift of rearing-his life cut short so soon,
brought down by the spear of lionhearted Ajax.
At the first charge he slashed his right nipple,
clean through the shoulder went the brazen point
and down in the dust he fell like a lithe black poplar
shot up tall and strong in the spreading marshy flats,
the trunk trimmed but its head a shock of branches.
A chariot-maker fells it with shining iron ax
as timber to bend for handsome chariot wheels
and there it lies, seasoning by the river .. .
So lay Anthemion's son Simoisius, cut down
by the giant royal Ajax.
Antiphus hurled at him—
the son of Priam wearing a gleaming breastplate
let fly through the lines but his sharp spear missed
and he hit Leucus instead, Odysseus' loyal comrade,
gouging his groin as the man hauled off a corpse-
it dropped from his hands and Leucus sprawled across it.
Enraged at his friend's death Odysseus sprang in fury,
helmed in fiery bronze he plowed through the front
and charging the enemy, glaring left and right
he hurled his spear-a glinting brazen streak-
and the Trojans gave ground, scattering back,
panicking there before his whirling shaft-
a direct hit! Odysseus struck Democoon,
Priam's bastard son come down from Abydos,
Priam's racing-stables. Incensed for the dead
Odysseus speared him straight through one temple
and out the other punched the sharp bronze point
and the dark came swirling thick across his eyes-
down he crashed, armor clanging against his chest.
And the Trojan front shrank back, glorious Hector too
as the Argives yelled and dragged away the corpses,
pushing on, breakneck on. But lord god Apollo,
gazing down now from the heights of Pergamus,
rose in outrage, crying down at the Trojans,
"Up and at them, you stallion-breaking Trojans!
Never give up your lust for war against these Argives!
What are their bodies made of, rock or iron to block
your tearing bronze? Stab them, slash their fleshl
Achilles the son of lovely sleek-haired Thetis—
the man's not even fighting, no, he wallows
in all his heartsick fury by the ships!"
So he cried
from far on the city's heights, the awesome god Apollo.
But Zeus's daughter Athena spurred the Argives on-
Athena first in glory, third-born of the gods-
whenever she saw some slacker hanging back
as she hurtled through the onset.
  Now Amarinceus' son
Diores—fate shackled Diores fast and a jagged rock
struck him against his right shin, beside the-ankle.
Pirous son of Imbrasus winged it hard and true,
the Thracian chief who had sailed across from Aenus ...
the ruthless rock striking the bones and tendons
crushed them to pulp-he landed flat on his back,
slamming the dust, both arms flung out to his comrades,
gasping out his life. Pirous who heaved the rock
came rushing in and speared him up the navel—
his bowels uncoiled, spilling loose on the ground
and the dark came swirling down across his eyes.
But Pirous—
Aetolian Thoas speared him as he swerved and sprang away,
the lancehead piercing his chest above the nipple
plunged deep in his lung, and Thoas, running up,
wrenched the heavy spear from the man's chest,
drew his blade, ripped him across the belly,
took his life but he could not strip his armor.
Look, there were Pirous' cohorts bunched in a ring,
Thracians, topknots waving, clutching their long pikes
and rugged, strong and proud as the Trojan Thoas was,
they shoved him back-he gave ground, staggering, reeling.
And so the two lay stretched in the dust, side-by-side,
a lord of Thrace, a lord of Epeans armed in bronze
and a ruck of other soldiers died around them.
And now
no man who waded into that work could scorn it any longer,
anyone still not speared or stabbed by tearing bronze
who whirled into the heart of all that slaughter—
not even if great Athena led him by the hand,
flicking away the weapons hailing down against him.
That day ranks of Trojans, ranks of Achaean fighters
sprawled there side-by-side, facedown in the dust.

Then Pallas Athena granted Tydeus' son Diomedes
strength and daring—so the fighter would shine forth
and tower over the Argives and win himself great glory.
She set the man ablaze, his shield and helmet flaming
with tireless fire like the star that flames at harvest,
bathed in the Ocean, rising up to outshine all other stars.
Such fire Athena blazed from Tydides' head and shoulders,
drove him into the center where the masses struggled on.

 

  There was a Trojan, Dares, a decent, wealthy man,
the god Hephaestus' priest who had bred two sons,
Phegeus and Idaeus, trained for every foray ...
Breaking ranks they rushed ahead in their chariot,
charging Diomedes already dismounted,
rearing up on foot.
They went for each other fast, close range-
Phegeus hurled first, his spear's shadow flew
and over Tydides' left shoulder the tip passed
and never touched his body. Tydides hurled next,
the bronze launched from his hand and not for nothing:
hitting Phegeus' chest between the nipples it pitched him out
behind his team. Idaeus leapt, abandoned the handsome car
but did not dare to stand and defend his dead brother-
and not even so would he have fled his black death
but the god of fire swept him off and saved him,
shrouding the man in night so the old priest
would not be wholly crushed with one son left.
But high-hearted Tydides drove away the team
and gave them to aides to lash both horses back
to the hollow ships. And now despite their courage
the Trojan fighters seeing the two sons of Dares,
one on the run, one dead beside his chariot-
all their hearts were stunned . . .
But Athena, eyes bright, taking Ares in hand,
called the violent god away with: "Ares, Ares,
destroyer of men, reeking blood, stormer of ramparts,
why not let these mortals fight it out for themselves?
Let Zeus give glory to either side he chooses.
We'll stay clear and escape the Father's rage."

 

  And so, luring the headlong Ares off the lines
Athena sat him down on Scamander's soft, sandy banks
while Argives bent the Trojans back. Each captain
killed his man. First Agamemnon lord of men
spilled the giant Odius, chief of the Halizonians
off his car—the first to fall, as he veered away
the spearhead punched his back between the shoulders,
gouging his flesh and jutting out through his ribs-
he fell with a crash, his armor rang against him.

 

  Idomeneus cut down Phaestus, Maeonian Borus' son
who shipped to Troy from the good rich earth of Tame.
As he tried to mount behind his team the famous spearman
stabbed a heavy javelin deep in his right shoulder—
he dropped from his war-car, gripped by the hateful dark.

 

  Then as Idomeneus' henchman stripped the corpse
Menelaus took Scamandrius down with a sharp spear—
Strophius' son, a crack marksman skilled at the hunt.
Artemis taught the man herself to track and kill
wild beasts, whatever breeds in the mountain woods,
but the Huntress showering arrows could not save him now
nor the archer's long shots, his forte in days gone by.
No, now Menelaus the great spearman ran him through,
square between the blades as he fled and raced ahead,
tearing into his flesh, drilling out through his chest
he crashed facedown, his armor clanged against him.

 

  Meriones killed Phereclus—son of Tecton,
son of the blacksmith Harmon-the fighter's hands
had the skill to craft all kinds of complex work
since Pallas Athena loved him most, her protege
who had built Paris his steady, balanced ships,
trim launchers of death, freighted with death
for all of Troy and now for the shipwright too:
what could the man know of all the gods' decrees?
Meriones caught him quickly, running him down hard
and speared him low in the right buttock—the point
pounding under the pelvis, jabbed and pierced the bladder-
he dropped to his knees, screaming, death swirling round him.

 

  Meges killed Pedaeus, Antenor's son, a bastard boy
but lovely Theano nursed him with close, loving care
like her own children, just to please her husband.
Closing, Meges gave him some close attention too—
the famous spearman struck behind his skull,
just at the neck-cord, the razor spear slicing
straight up through the jaws, cutting away the tongue—
he sank in the dust, teeth clenching the cold bronze.

 

  Euaemon's son Eurypylus cut down brave Hypsenor,
son of lofty Dolopion, a man the Trojans made
Scamander's priest and worshipped like a god.
But Euaemon's royal son laid low his son-
Eurypylus, chasing Hypsenor fleeing on before him,
flailed with a sword, slashed the Trojan's shoulder
and lopped away the massive bulk of Hypsenor's arm . . .
the bloody arm dropped to the earth, and red death
came plunging down his eyes, and the strong force of fate.

 

  So they worked away in the rough assaults, but Diomedes,
which side was the fighter on? You could not tell-
did he rampage now with the Trojans or the Argives?
Down the plain he stormed like a stream in spate,
a routing winter torrent sweeping away the dikes:
the tight, piled dikes can't hold it back any longer,
banks shoring the blooming vineyards cannot curb its course—
a flash flood bursts as the rains from Zeus pour down their power,
acre on acre the well-dug work of farmers crumbling under it-
so under Tydides' force the Trojan columns panicked now,
no standing their ground, massed, packed as they were.

 

But the shining archer Pandarus marked him storming
down the plain, smashing the Trojan lines before him.
Quickly he trained his reflex bow on Diomedes
charging straight ahead-he shot! he struck him full
in the right shoulder, under the breastplate's hollow
the ripping point tore deep, shearing its way through,
armor splattered with blood as Pandarus triumphed,
shouting over Tydides wildly, "Move up, attack,
my high-hearted Trojans, lash your stallions!
Look, the Achaean champion's badly wounded—
I shot him down, I swear he won't last long—
if the Archer really sped me here from Lycia!"
Bragging so,
but the whizzing arrow had not brought him down.
Diomedes just drew back beside his car and team
and stood there calling Sthenelus, Capaneus' son:
"Quick, Sthenelus. Down from the car, my friend,
pull this wretched arrow from my shoulder!"

 

  Sthenelus sprang from the car, hit the ground
and standing beside him, pulled the tearing arrow
clean on through the wound and blood came shooting out
like a red lance through the supple mesh shirt.
And Diomedes lord of the war cry prayed aloud,
"Hear me, daughter of Zeus whose shield is thunder,
tireless one, Athena! If you ever stood by father
with all your love amidst the blaze of battle,
stand by me--do me a favor now, Athena.
Bring that man into range and let me spear him!
He's wounded me off guard and now he triumphs-
he boasts 1 won't look long on the light of day."

 

  So Tydides prayed and Athena heard his prayer,
put spring in his limbs, his feet, his fighting hands
and close beside him winged him on with a flight of orders:
"Now take heart, Diomedes, fight it out with the Trojans!
Deep in your chest I've put your father's strength.
He never quaked, that Tydeus, that great horseman-
what force the famous shieldsman used to wield!
Look, I've lifted the mist from off your eyes
that's blurred them up to now—
so you can tell a god from man on sight.
So now if a god comes up to test your mettle,
you must not fight the immortal powers head-on,
all but one of the deathless gods, that is-
if Aphrodite daughter of Zeus slips into battle,
she's the one to stab with your sharp bronze spear!"

 

  Her eyes bright, Athena soared away and Tydeus' son
went charging back to the front line of champions.
Now, long ablaze as he was to fight the Trojans,
triple the fury seized him-claw-mad as a lion
some shepherd tending woolly flocks in the field
has just grazed, a lion leaping into the fold,
but he hasn't killed him, only spurred his strength
and helpless to beat him off the man scurries for shelter,
leaving his flocks panicked, lost as the ramping beast
mauls them thick-and-fast, piling corpse on corpse
and in one furious bound clears the fenced yard—
so raging Diomedes mauled the Trojans.
There—
he killed Astynous, then Hypiron, a frontline captain.
One he stabbed with a bronze lance above the nipple,
the other his heavy sword hacked at the collarbone,
right on the shoulder, cleaving the whole shoulder
clear of neck and back. And he left them there,
dead, and he made a rush at Abas and Polyidus,
sons of Eurydamas, an aged reader of dreams,
but the old prophet read no dreams for them
when they set out for Troy-Diomedes laid them low
then swung to attack the two sons of Phaenops,
hardy Xanthus and Thoon, both men grown tall
as their father shrank away with wasting age ...
he'd never breed more sons to leave his riches to.
The son of Tydeus killed the two of them on the spot,
he ripped the dear life out of both and left their father
tears and wrenching grief. Now he'd never welcome
his two sons home from war, alive in the flesh,
and distant kin would carve apart their birthright.

 

  Next Diomedes killed two sons of Dardan Priam
careening on in a single car, Echemmon and Chromius.
As a lion charges cattle, calves and heifers
browsing the deep glades and snaps their necks,
so Tydides pitched them both from the chariot,
gave them a mauling-gave them little choice—
quickly stripped their gear and passed their team
to his men to lash back to the ships.
Smashing
the lines of fighters now—
but Aeneas marked it all
and oblivious to the rain of spears he waded in,
hunting for Pandarus, hoping to find the archer.
Find him he did, Lycaon's skilled, fearless son,
and went right up and challenged him to his face:
"Pandarus, where's your bow, your winged arrows,
your archer's glory? No Trojan your rival here,
no Lycian can claim to be your better, no—
so up with you now! Lift your hands to Zeus,
you whip an arrow against that man, whoever he is
who routs us, wreaking havoc against us, cutting the legs
from under squads of good brave men. Unless it's a god
who smolders at our troops, enraged at a rite we failed-
when a god's enraged there's thunder at our heads.".

 

  And Lycaon's shining son took up the challenge:
"Aeneas, counselor of the Trojans armed in bronze,
he looks like Tydeus' son to me in every way-
I know his shield, the hollow eyes of his visor,
his team, I've watched them closely.
And still I could never swear he's not a god ...
but if he's the man I think he is, Tydeus' gallant son,
he rages so with a god beside him-not alone, no-
a god with his shoulders shrouded round in cloud
who deflects my shaft to a less mortal spot.
I had already whipped an arrow into him,
caught him square in the right shoulder too,
just where the breastplate leaves the armpit bare,
and I thought I'd sent him down to the House of Death
but I've still not laid him low. So it is some god rampaging!
And here I am, no chariot, no team to speed me on.
But back in Lycaon's halls are eleven war-cars,
beauties all, fresh from the smith and fire-new
and blankets spread across them. And beside each
a brace of stallions standing poised and pawing,
champing their oats and barley glistening white.
Over and over father, the old spearman Lycaon
urged me, setting out from his well-built halls,
'Take those teams and cars,' he told me, 'mount up,
lead the Trojans into the jolting shocks of battle!'
But would I listen? So much the better if I had ...
I had to spare my teams. They'd never starve for fodder-
crammed with the fighters-bred to eat their fill.
So I left them there, I made it to Troy on foot,
trusting my bows and arrows, and a lot of good
I was to get from them. Already I've let fly
at two of their best men, Diomedes and Menelaus-
I've hit them both, and the blood gushed from both,
direct hits, but I only roused their fury.
What bad luck—
to snatch this curved bow off its peg that day
I marched my Trojans hard to your lovely town of Troy,
to please Prince Hector. But if I get home again
and set my eyes on my native land, my wife
and my fine house with the high vaulting roof,
let some stranger cut my head off then and there
if I don't smash this bow and fling it in the fire-
the gear I packed is worthless as the wind."

 

  Aeneas the Trojan captain checked him sharply:
"No talk of turning for home! No turning the tide
till we wheel and face this man with team and car
and fight it out with weapons hand-to-hand.
Come, up with you now, climb aboard my chariot!
So you can see the breed of Tros's team, their flair
for their own terrain as they gallop back and forth,
one moment in flight, the next in hot pursuit.
They'll sweep us back to the city, back to safety
if Zeus hands Tydeus' son the glory once again.
Quick, take up the whip and glittering reins!
I'll dismount from the car and fight on foot-
or you engage the man and leave the team to me."

 

  The shining son of Lycaon made the choice:
"Take upy the reins yourself, Aeneas. Do-
they're your team, they'll haul your curving chariot
so much better under the driver they know best
if we have to beat retreat from Diomedes.
God forbid they panic, skittish with fear,
buck and never pull us out of the fighting,
missing your own voice as Tydeus' son attacks-
he'll kill us both and drive them off as prizes.
So drive them yourself, your chariot and your team
and let him charge—I'll take him on with a sharp spear."

 

  Both men agreed, boarding the blazoned chariot,
wildly heading their racers at Diomedes now.
Capaneus' good son Sthenelus saw them coming
and quickly alerted Diomedes, warnings flying:
"Tydides, joy of my heart, dear comrade, look!
I see two men and they're bearing down to fight you!
Their power's enormous—one's a master archer,
Pandarus, son of Lycaon, so he boasts.
The other's Aeneas, claims Anchises' blood,
the noble Anchises, but his mother's Aphrodite.
Come, up you go in our chariot, give ground now!
No charging the front ranks—you might lose your life."

 

  But powerful Diomedes -froze him with a glance:
"Not a word of retreat. You'll never persuade me.
It's not my nature to shrink from battle, cringe in fear
with the fighting strength still steady in my chest.
I shrink from mounting our chariot-no retreat-
on foot as I am, I'll meet them man-to-man.
Athena would never let me flinch. Those two?
Their horses will never sweep them clear of us,
not both men, though one or the other may escape.
One more thing—take it to heart, I tell you—
if part of Athena's plan gives me the honor
to kill them both, you check our racers here,
you lash them fast to our rails
then dash for Aeneas' horses—don't forget—
drive them out of the Trojan lines and into ours.
They are the very strain farseeing Zeus gave Tros,
payment in full for stealing Ganymede, Tros's son:
the purest, strongest breed of all the stallions
under the dawn and light of day. Lord Anchises
stole from that fine stock-behind Laomedon's back,
Tros's grandson and heir to Tros's teams—
he put some mares to the lusty stallions once
and they foaled him a run of six in his'royal house.
Four he kept for himself, to rear in his own stalls,
but the two you see in action he gave Aeneas,
both of them driving terrors. Would to god
we'd take them both—we'd win ourselves great fame."

 

  Wavering back and forth as their two attackers
closed in a rush, whipping that purebred team along
and Pandarus shouted first, "What mad bravado-
lofty Tydeus' boy will brave it out! So,
my arrow failed to bring you down, my tearing shot?
Now for a spear—we'll see if this can kill you!"

 

Shaft poised, he hurled and its long shadow flew
and it struck Tydides' shield, the brazen spearhead
winging, drilling right on through to his breastplate,
Pandarus yelling over him wildly now, "You're hit
clean through the side! You won't last long, I'd say-
now the glory's mine!"
  But never shaken,
staunch Diomedes shot back, "No hit you missed!
But the two of you will never quit this fight, I'd say,
till one of you drops and dies and gluts with blood
Ares who hacks at men behind his rawhide shield!"

 

  With that he hurled and Athena drove the shaft
and it split the archer's nose between the eyes—
it cracked his glistening teeth, the tough bronze
cut off his tongue at the roots, smashed his jaw
and the point came ripping out beneath his chin.
He pitched from his car, armor clanged against him,
a glimmering blaze of metal dazzling round his back—
the purebreds reared aside, hoofs pawing the air
and his life and power slipped away on the wind.

 

  Aeneas sprang down with his shield and heavy spear,
fearing the Argives might just drag away the corpse,
somehow, somewhere. Aeneas straddled the body-
proud in his fighting power like some lion-
shielded the corpse with spear and round buckler,
burning to kill off any man who met him face-to-face
and he loosed a bloodcurdling cry. Just as Diomedes
hefted a boulder in his hands, a tremendous feat—
no two men could hoist it, weak as men are now,
but all on his own he raised it high with ease,
flung it and struck Aeneas' thigh where the hipbone
turns inside the pelvis, the joint they call the cup-
it smashed the socket, snapped both tendons too
and the jagged rock tore back the skin in shreds.
The great fighter sank to his knees, bracing himself
with one strong forearm planted against the earth,
and the world went black as night before his eyes.

 

  And now the prince, the captain of men Aeneas
would have died on the spot if Zeus's daughter
had not marked him quickly, his mother Aphrodite
who bore him to King Anchises tending cattle once.
Round her beloved son her glistening arms went streaming,
flinging her shining robe before him, only a fold
but it blocked the weapons hurtling toward his body.
She feared some Argive fast with chariot-team
might hurl bronze in his chest and rip his life out.

 

  She began to bear her dear son from the fighting . . .
but Capaneus' son did not forget the commands
the lord of the war cry put him under. Sthenelus
checked his own racers clear of the crash of battle,
lashed them tight to his chariot-rails with reins
then dashed for Aeneas' glossy full-maned team
and drove them out of the Trojan lines and into his.
He passed them on to Deipylus, a friend-in-arms
he prized beyond all comrades his own age-
their minds worked as one-to drive to the ships
as Sthenelus mounted behind his own chariot now,
seized the glittering reins and whipped his team,
his strong-hoofed horses ahead at breakneck speed,
rearing, plunging to overtake his captain Diomedes
but he with his ruthless bronze was hunting Aphrodite-
Diomedes, knowing her for the coward goddess she is,
none of the mighty gods who marshal men to battle,
neither Athena nor Enyo raider of cities, not at all,
But once he caught her, stalking her through the onslaught,
gallant Tydeus' offspring rushed her, lunging out,
thrusting his sharp spear at her soft, limp wrist
and the brazen point went slashing through her flesh,
tearing straight 'through the fresh immortal robes
the Graces themselves had made her with their labor.
He gouged her just where the wristbone joins the palm
and immortal blood came flowing quickly from the goddess,
the ichor that courses through their veins, the blessed gods-
they eat no bread, they drink no shining wine, and so
the gods are bloodless, so we call them deathless.
A piercing shriek-she reeled and dropped her son.
But Phoebus Apollo plucked him up in his hands
and swathed him round in a swirling dark mist
for fear some Argive fast with chariot-team
might hurl bronze in his chest and rip his life out.
But Diomedes shouted after her, shattering war cries:
"Daughter of Zeus, give up the war, your lust for carnage!
So, it's not enough that you lure defenseless women
to their ruin? Haunting the fighting, are you?
Now I think you'll cringe at the hint of war
if you get wind of battle far away."
So he mocked
and the goddess fled the front, beside herself with pain.
But Iris quick as the wind took up her hand
and led her from the fighting ...
racked with agony, her glowing flesh blood-dark.
And off to the left of battle she discovered Ares,
violent Ares sitting there at ease, his long spear
braced on a cloudbank, flanked by racing stallions.
Aphrodite fell to her knees, over and over begged
her dear brother to lend his golden-bridled team:
"Oh dear brother, help me! Give me your horses-
so I can reach Olympus, the gods' steep stronghold.
I'm wounded, the pain's too much, a mortal's speared me—
that daredevil Diomedes, he'd fight Father Zeusl"

 

  Her brother Ares gave her the golden-bridled team.
Heart writhing in pain, she climbed aboard the car
and Iris climbed beside her, seized the reins,
whipped the team to a run and on the horses flew,
holding nothing back. In a moment they had reached
the immortals' stronghold, steep Olympus. Wind-quick Iris
curbed the team and loosing them from the chariot
threw ambrosial fodder down before their hoofs.
The deathless Aphrodite sank in Dione's lap
and her mother, folding her daughter in her arms,
stroked her gently, whispered her name and asked,
"Who has abused you now, dear child, tell me,
who of the sons of heaven so unfeeling, cruel?
Why, it's as if they had caught you in public,
doing something wrong. . . "

 

  And Aphrodite who loves eternal laughter
sobbed in answer, "The son of Tydeus stabbed me,
Diomedes, that overweening, insolent—all because
I was bearing off my son from the fighting. Aeneas—
dearest to me of all the men alive. Look down!
It's no longer ghastly war for Troy and Achaea-
now, I tell you, the Argives fight the gods!"

 

  Dione the light and loveliest of immortals
tried to calm her: "Patience, oh my child.
Bear up now, despite your heartsick grief.
How many gods who hold the halls of Olympus
have had to endure such wounds from mortal men,
whenever we try to cause each other pain ...
Ares had to endure it, when giant Ephialtes and Otus,
sons of Aloeus, bound him in chains he could not burst,
trussed him up in a brazen cauldron, thirteen months.
And despite the god's undying lust for battle
Ares might have wasted away there on the spot
if the monsters' stepmother, beautiful Eriboea
had not sent for Hermes, and out of the cauldron
Hermes stole him away-the War-god breathing his last,
all but broken down by the ruthless iron chains.
And Hera endured it too, that time Amphitryon's son,
mighty Heracles hit her deep in the right breast
with a three-barbed shaft, and pain seized her,
nothing calmed the pain.
Even tremendous Hades
had to endure that flying shaft like all the rest,
when the same man, the son of thunder-shielded Zeus,
shot him in Pylos—there with the troops of battle dead—
and surrendered Death to pain. But Hades made his way
to craggy Olympus, climbed to the house of Zeus,
stabbed with agony, grief-struck to the heart,
the shaft driven into his massive shoulder
grinding down his spirit . . .
But the Healer applied his pain-killing drugs
and sealed Hades' wound—he was not born to die.
Think of that breakneck Heracles, his violent work,
not a care in the world for all the wrongs he'd done-
he and his arrows raking the gods who hold Olympus!
But the man who attacked you? The great goddess
fiery-eyed Athena set him on, that fool-
Doesn't the son of Tydeus know, down deep,
the man who fights the gods does not live long?
Nor do his children ride his knees with cries of 'Father'—
home at last from the wars and heat of battle.
So now
let Diomedes, powerful as he is, be on his guard
for fear a better soldier than you engage him-
for fear his wife, Aegialia, Adrastus' daughter,
for all her self-control, will wail through the nights
and wake her beloved servants out of sleep . . .
the gallant wife in tears, longing for him,
her wedded husband, the best of the Achaeans—
Diomedes breaker of horses."
  Soothing words,
and with both her hands Dione gently wiped the ichor
from Aphrodite's arm and her wrist healed at once,
her stark pain ebbed away.
But Hera and great Athena were looking on
and with mocking words began to provoke the Father,
Athena leading off with taunts, her eyes bright:
"Father Zeus, I wonder if you would fume at me
if I ventured a bold guess? Our goddess of love—
I'd swear she's just been rousing another Argive,
another beauty to pant and lust for Trojans,
those men the goddess loves to such despair.
Stroking one of the Argive women's rippling gowns
she's pricked her limp wrist on a golden pinpoint!"

 

  So she mocked, and the father of gods and mortals
smiled broadly, calling the golden Aphrodite over:
"Fighting is not for you, my child, the works of war.
See to the works of marriage, the slow fires of longing.
Athena and blazing Ares will deal with all the bloodshed."

 

  And now as the high gods bantered back and forth
Diomedes, loosing his war cry, charged Aeneas-
though what he saw was lord Apollo himself,
guarding, spreading his arms above the fighter,
but even before the mighty god he would not flinch.
Tydides reared and hurled himself again and again,
trying to kill Aeneas, strip his famous armor.
Three times he charged, frenzied to bring him down,
three times Apollo battered his gleaming shield back-
then at Tydides' fourth assault like something superhuman,
the Archer who strikes from worlds away shrieked out -
a voice of terror—"Think, Diomedes, shrink back now!
Enough of this madness-striving with the gods.
We are not of the same breed, we never will be,
the deathless gods and men who walk the earth."
Menacing so
that Tydeus' son pulled back, just a little, edging
clear of the distant deadly Archer's rage.
And Apollo swept Aeneas up from the onslaught
and set him down on the sacred heights of Pergamus,
the crest where the god's own temple had been built.
There in the depths of the dark forbidden chamber
Leto and Artemis who showers flights of arrows
healed the man and brought him back to glory.
But the lord of the silver bow devised a phantom-
like Aeneas to the life, wearing his very armor-
and round that phantom Trojans and brave Achaeans
went at each other, hacking the oxhides round their chests,
the bucklers full and round, skin-shields, tassels flying.
But Phoebus Apollo called to blazing Ares, "Ares, Ares,
destroyer of men, reeking blood, stormer of ramparts,
can't you go and drag that man from the fighting?
That daredevil Diomedes, he'd fight Father Zeus!
He's just assaulted Love, he stabbed her wrist
like something superhuman he even charged at me!"

 

  With that,. Apollo settled onto Pergamus heights
while murderous Ares, wading into the fighting,
spurred the Trojan columns on to mass attack.
Shaped like the runner Acamas, prince of Thrace,
Ares challenged the sons of Priam with a vengeance:
"You royal sons of Priam, monarch dear to the gods,
how long will you let Achaeans massacre your army?
Until they're battling round your well-built gates?
A man is down we prized on a par with noble Hector—
Aeneas, proud Anchises' son., Up with you now,
rescue him from the crash of battle! Save our comrade!"

 

As Ares whipped the fighting spirit in each man
Sarpedon taunted Hector: "Hector, where has it gone-
that high courage you always carried in your heart?
No doubt you bragged that you could hold your city
without an army and Trojan allies—all on your own,
just with your sister's husbands and your brothers.
But where are they now? I look, I can't find one.
They cringe and cower like hounds circling a lion.
We-your allies here-we do your fighting for you.
And I myself, Hector, your ally-to-the-death,
a good long way I came from distant Lycia,
far from the Xanthus' rapids where I left
my loving wife, my baby son, great riches too,
the lasting envy of every needy neighbor.
And still I lead our Lycians into battle.
Myself? I chafe to face my man, full force,
though there's not a scrap of mine for looting here,
no cattle or gold the foe could carry off. But you,
you just stand there-don't even command the rest
to brace and defend their wives.
Beware the toils of war . . .
the mesh of the huge dragnet sweeping up the world,
before you're trapped, your enemies' prey and plunder—
soon they'll raze your sturdy citadel to the roots!
All this should obsess you, Hector, night and day.
You should be begging the men who lead your allies'
famous ranks to stand and fight for all they're worth—
you'll ward off all the blame they hurl against you."

 

  And Sarpedon's charge cut Hector to the core.
Down he leapt from his chariot fully armed, hit the ground
and brandishing two sharp spears went striding down his lines,
ranging flank to flank, driving his fighters into battle,
rousing grisly war—and round the Trojans whirled,
bracing to meet the Argives face-to-face:
but the Argives closed ranks, did not cave in.
Remember the wind that scatters the dry chaff,
sweeping it over the sacred threshing floor,
the men winnowing hard and blond Demeter culling
grain from dry husk in the rough and gusting wind
and under it all the heaps of chaff are piling white . . .
so white the Achaeans turned beneath the dust storm now,
pelting across their faces, kicked up by horses' hoofs
to the clear bronze sky-the battle joined again.
Charioteers swung chariots round,
thrust the powerful fist of fury straight ahead
and murderous Ares keen to help the Trojans
shrouded the carnage over in dense dark night-
lunging at all points, carrying out the commands
of Phoebus Apollo, lord of the golden sword,
who ordered Ares to whip the Trojans' war-lust
once he spotted Athena veering off the lines,
great Pallas who'd rushed to back the Argives.
Out of his rich guarded chamber the god himself
launched Aeneas now, driving courage into his heart
and the captain took his place amidst his men.
And how they thrilled to see him still alive,
safe, unharmed and marching back to their lines,
his soul ablaze for war, but his men asked him nothing.
The labor of battle would not let them, more labor urged
by the god of the silver bow and man-destroying Ares
and Strife flaring on, headlong on.
The Achaeans?
The two Aeantes, Tydides and Odysseus spurred them
on to attack. The troops themselves had no fear,
no dread of the Trojans' power and breakneck charges,
no, they stood their ground like heavy thunderheads
stacked up on the towering mountaintops by Cronus' son,
stock-still in a windless calm when the raging North Wind
and his gusty ripping friends that had screamed down
to rout dark clouds have fallen dead asleep. So staunch
they stood the Trojan onslaught, never shrinking once
as Atrides ranged the ranks, shouting out commands:
"Now be men, my friends! Courage, come, take heart!
Dread what comrades say of you here in bloody combat!
When men dread that, more men come through alive—
when soldiers break and run, good-bye glory,
good-bye all defenses!"
  A f'ash, a sudden hurl
and Atrides speared a champion out in front—
it was Prince Aeneas' comrade-in-arms Deicoon,
Pergasus' son the Trojans prized like Priam's sons,
quick as he always was to join the forward ranks.
Now his shield took powerful Agamemnon's spear
but failed to deflect it, straight through it smashed,
bronze splitting his belt and plunging down his guts—
he fell, thundering, armor ringing against him.
There—
Aeneas replied in kind and killed two Argive captains,
Diocles' two sons, Orsilochus flanking Crethon.
Their father lived in the fortress town of Phera,
a man of wealth and worth, born of Alpheus River
running wide through Pylian hills, the stream
that sired Ortilochus to rule their many men.
Ortilochus sired Diocles, that proud heart,
and Diocles bred Orsilochus twinned with Crethon
drilled for any fight. And reaching their prime
they joined the Argives sailing the black ships
outward bound for the stallion-land of Troy,
all for the sons of Atreus,
to fight to the end and win their honor back-
so death put an end to both, wrapped them both in night.
Fresh as two young lions off on the mountain ridges,
twins reared by a lioness deep in the dark glades,
that ravage shepherds' steadings, mauling the cattle
and fat sheep till it's their turn to die-hacked down
by the cleaving bronze blades in the shepherds' hands.
So here the twins were laid low at Aeneas' hands,
down they crashed like lofty pine trees axed.
Both down
but Menelaus pitied them both, yes, and out for blood
he burst through the front, helmed in fiery bronze,
shaking his spear, and Ares' fury drove him, Ares
hoping to see him crushed at Aeneas' hands.
Antilochus marked him now, great Nestor's son
went racing across the front himself, terrified
for the lord of armies—what if he were killed?
Their hard campaigning just might come to grief.
As Aeneas and Menelaus came within arm's reach,
waving whetted spears in each other's faces,
nerved to fight it out, Antilochus rushed in,
tensing shoulder-to-shoulder by his captain now-
and Aeneas shrank from battle, fast as he was in arms,
when he saw that pair of fighters side-by-side,
standing their ground against him . . .
Once they'd dragged the bodies back to their lines
they dropped the luckless twins in companions' open arms
and round they swung again to fight in the first ranks.

 

  And next they killed Pylaemenes tough as Ares,
a captain heading the Paphlagonian shieldsmen,
hot-blooded men. Menelaus the famous spearman
stabbed him right where he stood, the spearpoint
pounding his collarbone to splinters. Antilochus
killed his charioteer and steady henchman Mydon,
Atymnius' strapping son, just wheeling his racers round
as Antilochus winged a rock and smashed his elbow-
out of his grip the reins white with ivory flew
and slipped to the ground and tangled in the dust.
Antilochus sprang, he plunged a sword in his temple
and Mydon, gasping, hurled from his bolted car facefirst,
head and shoulders stuck in a dune a good long time
for the sand was soft and deep—his lucky day—
till his own horses trampled him down, down flat
as Antilochus lashed them hard and drove them back
to Achaea's waiting ranks.
  But Hector marked them
across the lines and rushed them now with a cry
and Trojan shock troops backed him full strength.
And Ares led them in with the deadly Queen Enyo
bringing Uproar on, the savage chaos of battle—
the god of combat wielding his giant shaft in hand,
now ranging ahead of Hector, now behind him.
Ares there—
and for all his war cries Diomedes shrank at the sight,
as a man at a loss, helpless, crossing a vast plain
halts short at a river rapids surging out to sea,
takes one look at the water roaring up in foam
and springs back with a leap. So he recoiled,
shouting out to comrades, "Oh my friends,
what fools we were to marvel at wondrous Hector,
what a spearman, we said, and what a daring fighter!
But a god goes with him always, beating off disaster—
look, that's Ares beside him now, just like a mortal!
Give ground, but faces fronting the Trojans always—
no use trying to fight the gods in force."
So he warned
as the Trojans charged them, harder-and Hector, lunging,
leveled a pair of men who knew the joy of battle,
riding a single chariot, Menesthes and Anchialus.
Down they went and the Great Ajax pitied both,
he strode to their side and loomed there,
loosed a gleaming spear and struck down Amphius,
Selagus' son who had lived at ease in Paesus,
rich in possessions, rich in rolling wheatland ...
But destiny guided Amphius on, a comrade sworn
to the cause of Priam and all of Priam's sons.
Now giant Ajax speared him through the belt,
deep in the guts the long, shadowy shaft stuck
and down he fell with a crash as glorious Ajax rushed
to strip his armor—Trojans showering spears against him,
points glittering round him, his shield taking repeated hits.
He dug his heel in the corpse, yanked his own bronze out
but as for the dead man's burnished gear-no hope.
The giant was helpless to rip it off his back.
Enemy weapons beating against him, worse,
he dreaded the Trojans too, swarming round him,
a tough ring of them, brave and bristling spears,
massing, rearing over their comrade's body now
and rugged, strong and proud as the Great Ajax was,
they shoved him back—he gave ground, staggering, reeling.

 

  So fighters worked away in the grim shocks of war.
And Heracles' own son, Tlepolemus tall and staunch . . .
his strong fate was driving him now against Sarpedon,
a man like a god. Closing quickly, coming head-to-head
the son and the son's son of Zeus who marshals storms,
Tlepolemus opened up to taunt his enemy first:
"Sarpedon, master strategist of the Lycians,
what compels you to cringe and cower here?
You raw recruit, green at the skills of battle!
They lie when they say you're born of storming Zeus.
Look at yourself. How short you fall of the fighters
sired by Zeus in the generations long before us!
Why, think what they say of mighty Heracles-
there was a man, my father,
that dauntless, furious spirit, that lionheart.
He once sailed here for Laomedon's blooded horses,
with just six ships and smaller crews than yours, true,
but he razed the walls of Troy, he widowed all her streets.
You with your coward's heart, your men dying round you!
You're no bulwark come out of Lycia, I can tell you—
no help to Trojans here. For all your power, soldier,
crushed at my hands you'll breach the gates of Death!"

 

  But Sarpedon the Lycian captain faced him down:
"Right you are, Tlepolemus! Your great father
destroyed the sacred heights of Troy, thanks,
of course, to a man's stupidity, proud Laomedon.
That fool—he rewarded all his kindness with abuse,
never gave him the mares he'd come so far to win.
But the only thing you'll win at my hands here,
I promise you, is slaughter and black doom.
Gouged by my spear you'll give me glory now,
you'll give your life to the famous horseman Death!"

 

  In fast reply Tlepolemus raised his ashen spear
and the same moment shafts flew from their hands
and Sarpedon hit him square across the neck,
the spear went ramming through-pure agony-
black night came swirling down across his eyes.
But Tlepolemus' shaft had struck Sarpedon too,
the honed tip of the weapon hitting his left thigh,
ferocious, razoring into flesh and scraping bone
but his Father beat off death a little longer.
  Heroic Sarpedon—
his loyal comrades bore him out of the fighting quickly,
weighed down by the heavy spearshaft dragging on.
But hurrying so, no one noticed or even thought
to wrench the ashen javelin from his thigh
so the man could hobble upright. On they rushed,
bent on the work of tending to his body.
Tlepolemus—
far across the lines the armed Achaeans hauled him
out of the fight, and seasoned Odysseus saw it,
his brave spirit steady, ablaze for action now.
What should he do?-he racked his heart and soul-
lunge at Prince Sarpedon, son of storming Zeus,
or go at the Lycians' mass and kill them all?
But no, it was not the gallant Odysseus' fate
to finish Zeus's rugged son with his sharp bronze,
so Pallas swung his fury against the Lycian front.
Whirling, killing Coeranus, Chromius and Alastor,
killing Alcander and Halius, Prytanis and Noemon-
and stalwart Odysseus would have killed still more
but tall Hector, his helmet flashing, marked him quickly,
plowed through the front, helmed in fiery bronze,
filling the Argives' hearts with sudden terror.
And Zeus's son Sarpedon rejoiced to see him
striding past and begged him in his pain,
"Son of Priam, don't leave me lying here,
such easy prey for the Danaans-protect me!
Later I'll bleed to death inside your walls.
Clearly it's not my fate
to journey home again to the fatherland I love,
to bring some joy to my dear wife, my baby son."
But Hector,
his helmet flashing, answered nothing-he swept past him,
Hector burning to thrust the Argives back at once
and tear the life and soul out of whole battalions.
But Sarpedon's loyal comrades laid him down,
a man like a god beneath a fine spreading oak
sacred to Zeus whose shield is banked with clouds.
The veteran Pelagon, one of his closest aides,
pushed the shaft of ashwood out through his wound—
his spirit left him-a mist poured down his eyes . . .
but he caught his breath again. A gust of the North Wind
blowing round him carried back the life breath
he had gasped away in pain.
  But the Argive fighters?
Facing Ares' power and Hector helmed in bronze,
they neither turned and ran for their black ships
nor traded blows with enemies man-to-man.
Backing over and over, the Argives gave ground,
seeing the lord of battles lead the Trojan onset.

 

  Who was the first they slaughtered, who the last,
the brazen god of war and Hector son of Priam?
Teuthras first, Orestes lasher of stallions next,
an Aetolian spearman Trechus, Oenomaus and Helenus,
Oenops' son, and Oresbius cinched with shining belt
who had lived in Hyle hoarding his great wealth,
his estate aslope the shores of Lake Cephisus,
and round him Boeotians held the fertile plain.

 

  But soon as the white-armed goddess Hera saw them
mauling Argive units caught in the bloody press,
she winged her words at Pallas: "What disaster!
Daughter of storming Zeus, tireless one, Athena-
how hollow our vow to Menelaus that he would sack
the mighty walls of Troy before he sailed for home-
if we let murderous Ares rampage on this way. Up now,
set our minds on our own fighting-fury!"
Hera's challenge—
and goddess Athena, her eyes afire, could not resist.
Hera queen of the gods, daughter of giant Cronus,
launched the work, harnessed the golden-bridled team
and Hebe quickly rolled the wheels to the chariot,
paired wheels with their eight spokes all bronze,
and bolted them on at both ends of the iron axle.
Fine wheels with fellies of solid, deathless gold
and round them running rims of bronze clamped fast—
a marvel to behold! The silver hubs spin round
on either side of the chariot's woven body,
gold and silver lashings strapping it tight,
double rails sweeping along its deep full curves
and the yoke-pole jutting forward, gleaming silver.
There at the tip she bound the gorgeous golden yoke,
she fastened the gorgeous golden breast straps next
and under the yoke Queen Hera led the horses, racers
blazing for war and the piercing shrieks of battle.

 

  Then Athena, child of Zeus whose shield is thunder,
letting fall her supple robe at the Father's threshold—
rich brocade, stitched with her own hands' labor—
donned the battle-shirt of the lord of lightning,
buckled her breastplate geared for wrenching war
and over her shoulders slung her shield, all tassels
flaring terror-Panic mounted high in a crown around it,
Hate and Defense across it, Assault to freeze the blood
and right in their midst the Gorgon's monstrous head,
that rippling dragon horror, sign of storming Zeus.
Then over her brows Athena placed her golden helmet
fronted with four knobs and forked with twin horns,
engraved with the fighting men of a hundred towns.
Then onto the flaming chariot Pallas set her feet
and seized her spear-weighted, heavy, the massive shaft
she wields to break the battle lines of heroes
the mighty Father's daughter storms against.
A crack of the whip—
the goddess Hera lashed the team, and all on their own force
the gates of heaven thundered open, kept by the Seasons,
guards of the vaulting sky and Olympus heights empowered
to spread the massing clouds or close them round once more.
Now straight through the great gates she drove the team,
whipping them on full tilt until they came to Zeus
the son of Cronus sitting far from the other gods,
throned on the topmost crag of rugged ridged Olympus.
And halting her horses near, the white-armed Hera
called out at once to the powerful son of Cronus,
pressing home her questions: "Father Zeus, look—
aren't you incensed at Ares and all his brutal work?
Killing so many brave Achaeans for no good reason,
not a shred of decency, just to wound my heart!
While there they sit at their royal ease, exulting,
the goddess of love and Apollo lord of the silver bow:
they loosed this manic Ares—he has no sense of justice.
Father Zeus . . . I wonder if you would fume at me
if I hurled a stunning blow at the god of war
and drove him from the fighting?"
Zeus the Father
who marshals ranks of storm clouds gave commands,
"Leap to it then. Launch Athena against him-
the queen of plunder, she's the one—his match,
a marvel at bringing Ares down in pain."

 

  So he urged and the white-armed goddess Hera
obeyed at once. And again she lashed her team
and again the stallions flew, holding nothing back,
careering between the earth and starry skies as far
as a man's glance can pierce the horizon's misting haze,
a scout on a watchtower who scans the wine-dark sea—
so far do the soaring, thundering horses of the gods
leap at a single stride. And once they reached
the plains of Troy where the two rivers flow,
where Simois and Scamander rush together,
the white-armed goddess Hera reined her team,
loosing them from the chariot-yoke and round them
poured' a dense shrouding mist and before their hoofs
the Simois sprang ambrosial grass for them to graze.

 

  The two immortals stepped briskly as wild doves,
quivering, keen to defend the fighting men of Argos.
Once they gained the spot where the most and bravest stood,
flanking strong Diomedes breaker of wild stallions—
massed like a pride of lions tearing raw flesh
or ramping boars whose fury never flags—
the white-armed goddess Hera rose and shouted
loud as the brazen voice of great-lunged Stentor
who cries out with the blast of fifty other men,
"Shame! Disgrace! You Argives, you degraded-
splendid in battle dress, pure sham!
As long as brilliant Achilles stalked the front
no Trojan would ever venture beyond the Dardan Gates,
they were so afraid of the man's tremendous spear.
Now they're fighting far away from the city,
right by your hollow ships!"
  So Hera trumpeted,
lashing the nerve and fighting-fury in each man
as Athena, her eyes blazing, made for Diomedes.
Hard by his team and car she found the king,
cooling the wound that Pandarus' arrow dealt him.
Sweat from under the heavy buckler's flat strap
had rubbed him raw, he was chafed and his arm ached
from lifting up the strap, wiping off the blood
and the dark clots. Laying hold of the yoke
that bound his team, the goddess Pallas started,
"So, Tydeus' son is half the size of his father,
and he was short and slight-but Tydeus was a fighter!
Even then, when I forbade him to go to war
or make a show of himself in others' eyes ...
that time, alone, apart from his men, he marched
the message into Thebes, filled with hordes of Thebans,
I told him to banquet in their halls and eat in peace.
But he always had that power, that courage from the first—
and so he challenged the brave young blades of Thebes
to tests of strength and beat them all with ease,
I urged him on with so much winning force.
But you, Tydides, I stand by you as well,
I guard you too. And with all good will I say,
fight it out with the Trojans here! But look at you-
fatigue from too much charging has sapped your limbs,
that or some lifeless fear has paralyzed you now.
So you're no offspring of Tydeus,
the gallant, battle-hardened Oeneus' son!"

 

  And powerful Diomedes bowed to her at once:
"Well I know you, Goddess, daughter of storming Zeus,
and so I will tell you all, gladly. I'll hide nothing.
It's not some lifeless fear that paralyzes me now,
no flinching from combat either.
It's your own command still ringing in my ears,
forbidding me to fight the immortals head-on,
all but one of the blessed gods, that is—
if Aphrodite daughter of Zeus slips into battle,
she's the one to stab with my sharp bronze spear.
So now, you see, I have given ground myself
and told my comrades to mass around me here.
Too well I know that Ares leads the charge."

 

  But the goddess roused him on, her eyes blazing:
"True son of Tydeus, Diomedes, joy of my heart!
Forget the orders-nothing to fear, my friend,
neither Ares nor any other god. You too,
I'll urge you on with so much winning force.
Up now! Lash your racing horses at Ares first,
strike him at close range, no shrinking away here
before that headlong Ares! Just look at the maniac,
born for disaster, double-dealing, lying two-faced god-
just now he promised me and Hera, the War-god swore
he'd fight the Trojans, stand behind the Argives.
But now, look, he's leading the Trojan rampage,
his pledges thrown to the winds!"
  With that challenge
Athena levered Sthenelus out the back of the car.
A twist of her wrist and the man hit the ground,
springing aside as the goddess climbed aboard,
blazing to fight beside the shining Diomedes.
The big oaken axle groaned beneath the weight,
bearing a great man and a terrifying goddess-
and Pallas Athena seized the reins and whip,
lashing the racing horses straight at Ares.
The god was just stripping giant Periphas bare,
the Aetolians' best fighter, Ochesius' noble son-
the blood-smeared Ares was tearing off his gear
but Athena donned the dark helmet of Death
so not even stark Ares could see her now.
But the butcher did see Tydeus' rugged son
and he dropped gigantic Periphas on the spot
where he'd just killed him, ripped his life away
and Ares whirled at the stallion-breaking Diomedes—
the two of them closing fast, charging face-to-face
and the god thrust first, over Tydides' yoke and reins,
with bronze spear burning to take the fighter's life.
But Athena, her eyes afire, grabbed the flying shaft,
flicked it over the car and off it flew for nothing—
and after him Diomedes yelled his war cry, lunging out
with his own bronze spear and Pallas rammed it home,
deep in Ares' bowels where the belt cinched him tight.
There Diomedes aimed and stabbed, he gouged him down
his glistening flesh and wrenched the spear back out
and the brazen god of war let loose a shriek, roaring,
thundering loud as nine, ten thousand combat soldiers
shriek with Ares' fury when massive armies clash.
A shudder swept all ranks, Trojans and Argives both,
terror-struck by the shriek the god let loose,
Ares whose lust for slaughter never dies.
But now,
wild as a black cyclone twisting out of a cloudbank,
building up from the day's heat, blasts and towers-
so brazen Ares looked to Tydeus' son Diomedes.
Soaring up with the clouds to the broad sweeping sky
he quickly gained the gods' stronghold, steep Olympus,
and settling down by the side of Cronus' great son Zeus,
his spirit racked with pain, Ares displayed the blood,
the fresh immortal blood that gushed from his wound,
and burst out in a flight of self-pity: "Father Zeus,
aren't you incensed to see such violent brutal work?
We everlasting gods . . . Ah what chilling blows
we suffer-thanks to our own conflicting wills-
whenever we show these mortal men some kindness.
And we all must battle you—
you brought that senseless daughter into the world,
that murderous curse-forever bent on crimes!
While all the rest of us, every god on Olympus
bows down to you, each of us overpowered.
But that girl—
you never block her way with a word or action, never,
you spur her on, since you, you gave her birth
from your own head, that child of devastation!
Just look at this reckless Diomedes now—
Athena spurred him on to rave against the gods.
First he lunges at Aphrodite, stabs her hand at the wrist
then charges me—even me—like something superhuman!
But I, I'm so fast on my feet I saved my life.
Else for a good long while I'd have felt the pain,
writhing among the corpses there, or soldiered on,
weak as a breathless ghost, beaten down by bronze."

 

  But Zeus who marshals storm clouds lowered a dark glance
and let loose at Ares: "No more, you lying, two-faced ...
no more sidling up to me, whining here before me.
You—I hate you most of all the Olympian gods.
Always dear to your heart,
strife, yes, and battles, the bloody grind of war.
You have your mother's uncontrollable rage-incorrigible,
that Hera—say what I will, I can hardly keep her down.
Hera's urgings, I trust,' have made you suffer this.
But I cannot bear to see you agonize so long.
You are my child. To me your mother bore you.
If you had sprung from another god, believe me,
and grown into such a blinding devastation,
long ago you'd have dropped below the Titans,
deep in the dark pit."
  So great Zeus declared
and ordered the healing god to treat the god of war.
And covering over his wound with pain-killing drugs
the Healer cured him: the god was never born to die.
Quickly as fig-juice, pressed into bubbly, creamy milk,
curdles it firm for the man who churns it round,
so quickly he healed the violent rushing Ares.
And Hebe washed him clean, dressed him in robes
to warm his heart, and flanking the son of Cronus
down he sat, Ares exultant in the glory of it all.

 

  And now the two returned to the halls of mighty Zeus—
Hera of Argos, Boeotian Athena, guard of armies, both
had stopped the murderous Ares' cutting men to pieces.

So the clash of Achaean and Trojan troops was on its own,
the battle in all its fury veering back and forth,
careering down the plain
as they sent their bronze lances hurtling side-to-side
between the Simois' banks and Xanthus' swirling rapids.

 

  That Achaean bulwark giant Ajax came up first,
broke the Trojan line and brought his men some hope,
spearing the bravest man the Thracians fielded,
Acamas tall and staunch, Eussorus' son.
The first to hurl, Great Ajax hit the ridge
of the helmet's horsehair crest—the bronze point
stuck in Acamas' forehead pounding through the skull
and the dark came swirling down to shroud his eyes.

 

  A shattering war cry! Diomedes killed off Axylus,
Teuthras' son who had lived in rock-built Arisbe,
a man of means and a friend to all mankind,
at his roadside house he'd warm all comers in.
But who of his guests would greet his enemy now,
meet him face-to-face and ward off grisly death?
Diomedes killed the man and his aide-in-arms at once,
Axylus and Calesius who always drove his team-
both at a stroke he drove beneath the earth.

 

  Euryalus killed Dresus, killed Opheltius,
turned and went for Pedasus and Aesepus, twins
the nymph of the spring Abarbarea bore Bucolion . . .
Bucolion, son himself to the lofty King Laomedon,
first of the line, though his mother bore the prince
in secrecy and shadow. Tending his flocks one day
Bucolion took the nymph in a strong surge of love
and beneath his force she bore him twin sons.
But now the son of Mecisteus hacked the force
from beneath them both and loosed their gleaming limbs
and tore the armor off the dead men's shoulders.

 

  Polypoetes braced for battle killed Astyalus—
Winging his bronze spear Odysseus slew Pidytes
bred in Percote, and Teucer did the same
for the royal Aretaon—
  Ablerus went down too,
under the flashing lance of Nestor's son Antilochus,
and Elatus under the lord of men Agamemnon's strength—
Elatus lived by the banks of rippling Satniois,
in Pedasus perched on cliffs—
The hero Leitus
ran Phylacus down to ground at a dead run
and Eurypylus killed Melanthius outright—
But Menelaus
lord of the war cry had caught Adrestus alive.
Rearing, bolting in terror down the plain
his horses snared themselves in tamarisk branches,
splintered his curved chariot just at the pole's tip
and breaking free they made a dash for the city walls
where battle-teams by the drove stampeded back in panic.
But their master hurled from the chariot, tumbling over the wheel
and pitching facedown in the dust, and above him now
rose Menelaus, his spear's long shadow looming.
Adrestus hugged his knees and begged him, pleading,
"Take me alive, Atrides, take a ransom worth my life!
Treasures are piled up in my rich father's house,
bronze and gold and plenty of well-wrought iron—
father would give you anything, gladly, priceless ransom
if only he learns I'm still alive in Argive ships!"

 

  His pleas were moving the heart in Menelaus,
just at the point of handing him to an aide
to take him back to the fast Achaean ships . . .
when up rushed Agamemnon, blocking his way
and shouting out, "So soft, dear brother, why?
Why such concern for enemies? I suppose you got
such tender loving care at home from the Trojans.
Ah would to god not one of them could escape
his sudden plunging death beneath our hands!
No baby boy still in his mother's belly,
not even he escape—all Ilium blotted out,
no tears for their lives, no markers for their graves!"

 

  And the iron warrior brought his brother round—
rough justice, fitting too.
Menelaus shoved Adrestus back with a fist,
powerful Agamemnon stabbed him in the flank
and back on his side the fighter went, faceup.
The son of Atreus dug a heel in his heaving chest
and wrenched the ash spear out.
  And here came Nestor
with orders ringing down the field: "My comrades—
fighting Danaans, aides of Ares—no plunder now!
Don't lag behind, don't fling yourself at spoils
just to haul the biggest portion back to your ship.
Now's the time for killing! Later, at leisure,
strip the corpses up and down the plain!"

 

  So he ordered, spurring each man's nerve—
and the next moment crowds of Trojans once again
would have clambered back inside their city walls,
terror-struck by the Argives primed for battle.
But Helenus son of Priam, best of the seers
who scan the flight of birds, came striding up
to Aeneas and Hector, calling out, "My captains!
You bear the brunt of Troy's and Lycia's fighting—
you are our bravest men, whatever the enterprise,
pitched battle itself or planning our campaigns,
so stand your ground right here!
Go through the ranks and rally all the troops.
Hold back our retreating mobs outside the gates
before they throw themselves in their women's arms in fear,
a great joy to our enemies closing for the kill.
And once you've roused our lines to the last man,
we'll hold out here and fight the Argives down,
hard-hit as we are—necessity drives us on.
But you,
Hector, you go back to the city, tell our mother
to gather all the older noble women together
in gray-eyed Athena's shrine on the city's crest,
unlock the doors of the goddess' sacred chamber—
and take a robe, the largest, loveliest robe
that she can find throughout the royal halls,
a gift that far and away she prizes most herself,
and spread it out across the sleek-haired goddess' knees.
Then promise to sacrifice twelve heifers in her shrine,
yearlings never broken, if only she'll pity Troy,
the Trojan wives and all our helpless children,
if only she'll hold Diomedes back from the holy city—
that wild spearman, that invincible headlong terror!
He is the strongest Argive now, I tell you.
Never once did we fear Achilles so,
captain of armies, born of a goddess too,
or so they say. But here's a maniac run amok—
no one can match his fury man-to-man!"
So he urged
and Hector obeyed his brother start to finish.
Down he leapt from his chariot fully armed, hit the ground
and brandishing two sharp spears went striding down his lines,
ranging flank to flank, driving his fighters into battle,
rousing grisly war-and round the Trojans whirled,
bracing to meet the Argives face-to-face.
And the Argives gave way, they quit the slaughter-
they thought some god swept down from the starry skies
to back the Trojans now, they wheeled and rallied so.
Hector shouted out to his men in a piercing voice,
"Gallant-hearted Trojans and far-famed allies!
Now be men, my friends, call up your battle-fury!
Till I can return to Troy and tell them all,
the old counselors, all our wives, to pray to the gods
and vow to offer them many splendid victims."

 

  As Hector turned for home his helmet flashed
and the long dark hide of his bossed shield, the rim
running the metal edge, drummed his neck and ankles.
And now
Glaucus son of Hippolochus and Tydeus' son Diomedes
met in the no man's land between both armies:
burning for battle, closing, squaring off
and the lord of the war cry Diomedes opened up,
"Who are you, my fine friend?-another born to die?
I've never noticed you on the lines where we win glory,
not till now. But here you come, charging out
in front of all the rest with such bravado-
daring to face the flying shadow of my spear.
Pity the ones whose sons stand up to me in war!
But if you are an immortal come from the blue,
I'm not the man to fight the gods of heaven.
Not even Dryas' indestructible son Lycurgus,
not even he lived long . . .
that fellow who tried to fight the deathless gods.
He rushed at the maenads once, nurses of wild Dionysus,
scattered them breakneck down the holy mountain Nysa.
A rout of them strewed their sacred staves on the ground,
raked with a cattle prod by Lycurgus, murderous fool!
And Dionysus was terrified, he dove beneath the surf
where the sea-nymph Thetis pressed him to her breast—
Dionysus numb with fear: shivers racked his body,
thanks to the raucous onslaught of that man.
But the gods who live at ease lashed out against him—
worse, the son of Cronus struck Lycurgus blind.
Nor did the man live long, not' with the hate.
of all the gods against him.
No, my friend,
I have no desire to fight the blithe immortals.
But if you're a man who eats the crops of the earth,
a mortal born for death-here, come closer,
the sooner you will meet your day to die!"

 

  The noble son of Hippolochus answered staunchly,
"High-hearted son of Tydeus, why ask about my birth?
Like the generations of leaves, the lives of mortal men.
Now the wind scatters the old leaves across the earth,
now the living timber bursts with the new buds
and spring comes round again. And so with men:
as one generation comes to life, another dies away.
But about my birth, if you'd like to learn it well,
first to last—though many people know it—
here's my story . . .
  There is a city, Corinth,
deep in a bend of Argos, good stallion-country
where Sisyphus used to live, the wiliest man alive.
Sisyphus, Aeolus' son, who had a son called Glaucus,
and in his day Glaucus sired brave Bellerophon,
a man without a fault. The gods gave him beauty
and the fine, gallant traits that go with men.
But Proetus plotted against him. Far stronger,
the king in his anger drove him out of Argos,
the kingdom Zeus had brought beneath his scepter.
Proetus' wife, you see, was mad for Bellerophon,
the lovely Antea lusted to couple with him,
all in secret. Futile—she could never seduce
the man's strong will, his seasoned, firm resolve.
So straight to the king she went, blurting out her lies:
‘I wish you'd die, Proetus, if you don't kill Bellerophon!
Bellerophon's bent on dragging me down with him in lust
though I fight him all the way!'
All of it false
but the king seethed when he heard a tale like that.
He balked at killing the man-he'd some respect at least
but he quickly sent him off to Lycia, gave him tokens,
murderous signs, scratched in a folded tablet,
and many of them too, enough to kill a man.
He told him to show them to Antea's father:
that would mean his death.
  So off he went to Lycia,
safe in the escort of the gods, and once he reached
the broad highlands cut by the rushing Xanthus,
the king of Lycia gave him a royal welcome.
Nine days he feasted him, nine oxen slaughtered.
When the tenth Dawn shone with her rose-red fingers,
he began to question him, asked to see his credentials,
whatever he brought him from his in-law, Proetus.
But then, once he received that fatal message
sent from his own daughter's husband, first
he ordered Bellerophon to kill the Chimaera-
grim monster sprung of the gods, nothing human,
all lion in front, all snake behind, all goat between,
terrible, blasting lethal fire at every breath!
But he laid her low, obeying signs from the gods.
Next he fought the Solymi, tribesmen bent on glory,
roughest battle of men he ever entered, so he claimed.
Then for a third test he brought the Amazons down,
a match for men in war. But as he turned back,
his host spun out the tightest trap of all:
picking the best men from Lycia far and wide
he set an ambush—that never came hone again!
Fearless Bellerophon killed them all.

 

Then, yes,
when the king could see the man's power at last,
a true son of the gods, he pressed him hard to stay,
he ofi'ered his own daughter's hand in marriage,
he gave him half his royal honors as the king.
And the Lycians carved him out a grand estate,
the choicest land in the realm, rich in vineyards
and good tilled fields for him to lord it over.
And his wife bore good Bellerophon three children:
Isander, Hippolochus and Laodamia. Laodamia
lay in the arms of Zeus who rules the world
and she bore the god a son, our great commander,
Sarpedon helmed in bronze.
  But the day soon came
when even Bellerophon was hated by all the gods.
Across the Alean plain he wandered, all alone,
eating his heart out, a fugitive on the run
from the beaten tracks of men. His son Isander?
Killed by the War-god, never sated—a boy fighting
the Solymi always out for glory. Laodamia? Artemis,
flashing her golden reins, cut her down in anger.
But Hippolochus fathered me, I'm proud to say.
He sent me off to Troy . . .
and I hear his urgings ringing in my ears:
'Always be the best, my boy, the bravest,
and hold your head up high above the others.
Never disgrace the generation of your fathers.
They were the bravest champions born in Corinth,
in Lycia far and wide.'
There you have my lineage.
That is the blood I claim, my royal birth."

 

  When he heard that, Diomedes' spirits lifted.
Raising his spear, the lord of the war cry drove it home,
planting it deep down in the earth that feeds us all
and with winning words he called out to Glaucus,
the young captain, "Splendid-you are my friend,
my guest from the days of our grandfathers long ago!
Noble Oeneus hosted your brave Bellerophon once,
he held him there in his halls, twenty whole days,
and they gave each other handsome gifts of friendship.
My kinsman offered a gleaming sword-belt, rich red,
Bellerophon gave a cup, two-handled, solid gold—
I left it at home when I set out for Troy.
My father, Tydeus, I really don't remember.
I was just a baby when father left me then,
that time an Achaean army went to die at Thebes.
So now I am your host and friend in the heart of Argos,
you are mine in Lycia when I visit in your country.
Come, let us keep clear of each other's spears,
even there in the thick of battle. Look,
plenty of Trojans there for me to kill,
your famous allies too, any soldier the god
will bring in range or I can run to ground.
And plenty of Argives too—kill them if you can.
But let's trade armor. The men must know our claim:
we are sworn friends from our fathers' days till now!"

 

  Both agreed. Both fighters sprang from their chariots,
clasped each other's hands and traded pacts of friendship.
But the son of Cronus, Zeus, stole Glaucus' wits away.
He traded his gold armor for bronze with Diomedes,
the worth of a hundred oxen just for nine.
And now,
when Hector reached the Scaean Gates and the great oak,
the wives and daughters of Troy came rushing up around him,
asking about their sons, brothers, friends and husbands.
But Hector told them only, "Pray to the gods"—
all the Trojan women, one after another . . .
Hard sorrows were hanging over many.
And soon
he came to Priam's palace, that magnificent structure
built wide with porches and colonnades of polished stone.
And deep within its walls were fifty sleeping chambers
masoned in smooth, lustrous ashlar, linked in a line
where the sons of Priam slept beside their wedded wives,
and facing these, opening out across the inner courtyard,
lay the twelve sleeping chambers of Priam's daughters,
masoned and roofed in lustrous ashlar, linked in a line
where the sons-in-law of Priam slept beside their wives.
And there at the palace Hector's mother met her son,
that warm, goodhearted woman, going in with Laodice,
the loveliest daughter Hecuba ever bred. His mother
clutched his hand and urged him, called his name:
"My child-why have you left the bitter fighting,
why have you come home? Look how they wear you out,
the sons of Achaea—curse them—battling round our walls!
And that's why your spirit brought you back to Troy,
to climb the heights and stretch your arms to Zeus.
But wait, I'll bring you some honeyed, mellow wine.
First pour out cups to Father Zeus and the other gods,
then refresh yourself, if you'd like to quench your thirst.
When a Man's exhausted, wine will build his strength—
battle-weary as you are, fighting for your people."

 

  But Hector shook his head, his helmet flashing:
"Don't offer me mellow wine, mother, not now-
you'd sap my limbs, I'd lose my nerve for war.
And I'd be ashamed to pour a glistening cup to Zeus
with unwashed hands. I'm splattered with blood and filth-
how could I pray to the lord of storm and lightning?
No, mother, you are the one to pray.
Go to Athena's shrine, the queen of plunder,
go with offerings, gather the older noble women
and take a robe, the largest, loveliest robe
that you can find throughout the royal halls,
a gift that far and away you prize most yourself,
and spread it out across the sleek-haired goddess' knees.
Then promise to sacrifice twelve heifers in her shrine,
yearlings never broken, if only she'll pity Troy,
the Trojan wives and all our helpless children,
if only she'll hold Diomedes back from the holy city-
that wild spearman, that invincible headlong terror!
Now, mother, go to the queen of plunder's shrine
and I'll go hunt for Paris, summon him to fight
if the man will hear what I have to say . . .
Let the earth gape and swallow him on the spot!
A great curse Olympian Zeus let live and grow in him,
for Troy and high-hearted Priam and all his sons.
That man—if I could see him bound for the House of Death,
I could say my heart had forgot its wrenching grief!"

 

  But his mother simply turned away to the palace.
She gave her servants orders and out they strode
to gather the older noble women through the city.
Hecuba went down to a storeroom filled with scent
and there they were, brocaded, beautiful robes . . .
the work of Sidonian women. Magnificent Paris
brought those women back himself from Sidon,
sailing the open seas on the same long voyage
he swept Helen off, her famous Father's child.
Lifting one from the lot, Hecuba brought it out
for great Athena's gift, the largest, loveliest,
richly worked, and like a star it glistened,
deep beneath the others. Then she made her way
with a file of noble women rushing in her train.

 

  Once they reached Athena's shrine on the city crest
the beauty Theano opened the doors to let them in,
Cisseus' daughter, the horseman Antenor's wife
and Athena's priestess chosen by the Trojans. Then-
with a shrill wail they all stretched their arms to Athena
as Theano, her face radiant, lifting the robe on high,
spread it out across the sleek-haired goddess' knees
and prayed to the daughter of mighty Father Zeus:
"Queen Athena—shield of our city-glory of goddesses!
Now shatter the spear of Diomedes! That wild man-
hurl him headlong down before the Scaean Gates!
At once we'll sacrifice twelve heifers in your shrine,
yearlings never broken, if only you'll pity Troy,
the Trojan wives and all our helpless children!"

 

  But Athena refused to hear Theano's prayers.
And while they prayed to the daughter of mighty Zeus
Hector approached the halls of Paris, sumptuous halls
he built himself with the finest masons of the day,
master builders famed in the fertile land of Troy.
They'd raised his sleeping chamber, house and court
adjoining Priam's and Hector's aloft the city heights.
Now Hector, dear to Zeus, strode through the gates,
clutching a thrusting-lance eleven forearms long;
the bronze tip of the weapon shone before him,
ringed with a golden hoop to grip the shaft.
And there in the bedroom Hector came on Paris
polishing, fondling his splendid battle-gear,
his shield and breastplate, turning over and over
his long curved bow. And there was Helen of Argos,
sitting with all the women of the house, directing
the rich embroidered work they had in hand.
Seeing Paris,
Hector raked his brother with insults, stinging taunts:
"What on earth are you doing? Oh how wrong it is,
this anger you keep smoldering in your heart! Look,
your people dying around the city, the steep walls,
dying in arms-and all for you, the battle cries
and the fighting flaring up around the citadel.
You'd be the first to lash out at another—anywhere—
you saw hanging back from this, this hateful war.
Up with you—
before all Troy is torched to a cinder here and now!"

 

  And Paris, magnificent as a god, replied,
"Ah Hector, you criticize me fairly, yes,
nothing unfair, beyond what I deserve. And so
I will try to tell you something. Please bear with me,
hear me out. It's not so much from anger or outrage
at our people that I keep to my rooms so long.
I only wanted to plunge myself in grief.
But just now my wife was bringing me round,
her winning words urging me back to battle.
And it strikes me, even me, as the better way.
Victory shifts, you know, now one man, now another.
So come, wait while I get this war-gear on,
or you go on ahead and I will follow—
I think I can overtake you."
  Hector, helmet flashing,
answered nothing. And Helen spoke to him now,
her soft voice welling up: "My dear brother,
dear to me, bitch that I am, vicious, scheming-
horror to freeze the heart! Oh how I wish
that first day my mother brought me into the light
some black whirlwind had rushed me out to the mountains
or into the surf where the roaring breakers crash and drag
and the waves had swept me off before all this had happened!
But since the gods ordained it all, these desperate years,
I wish I had been the wife of a better man, someone
alive to outrage, the withering scorn of men.
This one has no steadiness in his spirit,
not now, he never will . . .
and he's going to reap the fruits of it, I swear.
But come in, rest on this seat with me, dear brother.
You are the one hit hardest by the fighting, Hector,
you more than all—and all for me, whore that I am,
and this blind mad Paris. Oh the two of us!
Zeus planted a killing doom within us both,
so even for generations still unborn
we will live in song."
  Turning to go,
his helmet flashing, tall Hector answered,
"Don't ask 'me to sit beside you here, Helen.
Love me as you do, you can't persuade me now.
No time for rest. My heart races to help our Trojans—
they long for me, sorely, whenever I am gone.
But rouse this fellow, won't you?
And let him hurry himself along as well,
so he can overtake me before I leave the city.
For I must go home to see my people first,
to visit my own dear wife and my baby son.
Who knows if I will ever come back to them again?—
or the deathless gods will strike me down at last
at the hands of Argive fighters."
  A flash of his helmet
and off he strode and quickly reached his sturdy,
well-built house. But white-armed Andromache-
Hector could not find her in the halls.
She and the boy and a servant finely gowned
were standing watch on the tower, sobbing, grieving.
When Hector saw no sign of his loyal wife inside
he went to the doorway, stopped and asked the servants,
"Come, please, tell me the truth now, women.
Where's Andromache gone? To my sisters' house?
To my brothers' wives with their long flowing robes?
Or Athena's shrine where the noble Trojan women
gather to win the great grim goddess over?"

 

  A busy, willing servant answered quickly,
"Hector, seeing you want to know the truth,
she hasn't gone to your sisters, brothers' wives
or Athena's shrine where the noble Trojan women
gather to win the great grim goddess over.
Up to the huge gate-tower of Troy she's gone
because she heard our men are so hard-pressed,
the Achaean fighters coming on in so much force.
She sped to the wall in panic, like a madwoman—
the nurse went with her, carrying your child."

 

  At that, Hector spun and rushed from his house,
back by the same way down the wide, well-paved streets
throughout the city until he reached the Scaean Gates,
the last point he would pass to gain the field of battle.
There his warm, generous wife came running up to meet him,
Andromache the daughter of gallant-hearted Eetion
who had lived below Mount Placos rich with timber,
in Thebe below the peaks, and ruled Cilicia's people.
His daughter had married Hector helmed in bronze.
She joined him now, and following in her steps
a servant holding the boy against her breast,
in the first flush of life, only a baby,
Hector's son, the darling of his eyes
and radiant as a star . . .
Hector would always call the boy Scamandrius,
townsmen called him Astyanax, Lord of the City,
since Hector was the lone defense of Troy.
The great man of war breaking into a broad smile,
his gaze fixed on his son, in silence. Andromache,
pressing close beside him and weeping freely now,
clung to his hand, urged him, called him: "Reckless one,
my Hector-your own fiery courage will destroy you!
Have you no pity for him, our helpless son? Or me,
and the destiny that weighs me down, your widow,
now so soon? Yes, soon they will kill you off,
all the Achaean forces massed for assault, and then,
bereft of you, better for me to sink beneath the earth.
What other warmth, what comfort's left for me,
once you have met your doom? Nothing but torment!
I have lost my father. Mother's gone as well.
Father . . . the brilliant Achilles laid him low
when he stormed Cilicia's city filled with people,
Thebe with her towering gates. He killed Eetion,
not that he stripped his gear-he'd some respect at least—
for he burned his corpse in all his blazoned bronze,
then heaped a grave-mound high above the ashes
and nymphs of the mountain planted elms around it,
daughters of Zeus whose shield is storm and thunder.
And the seven brothers I had within our halls . . .
all in the same day went down to the House of Death,
the great godlike runner Achilles butchered them all,
tending their shambling oxen, shining flocks.
And mother,
who ruled under the timberline of woody Placos once—
he no sooner haled her here with his other plunder
than he took a priceless ransom, set her free
and home she went to her father's royal halls
where Artemis, showering arrows, shot her down.

 

You, Hector-you are my father now, my noble mother,
a brother too, and you are my husband, young and warm and strong!
Pity me, please! Take your stand on the rampart here,
before you orphan your son and make your wife a widow.
Draw your armies up where the wild fig tree stands,
there, where the city lies most open to assault,
the walls lower, easily overrun. Three times
they have tried that point, hoping to storm Troy,
their best fighters led by the Great and Little Ajax,
famous Idomeneus, Atreus' sons, valiant Diomedes.
Perhaps, a skilled prophet revealed the spot—
or their own fury whips them on to attack."

 

  And tall Hector nodded, his helmet flashing:
"All this weighs on my mind too, dear woman.
But I would die of shame to face the men of Troy
and the Trojan women trailing their long robes
if I would shrink from battle now, a coward.
Nor does the spirit urge me on that way.
I've learned it all too well. To stand up bravely,
always to fight in the front ranks of Trojan soldiers,
winning my father great glory, glory for myself.
For in my heart and soul I also know this well:
the day will come when sacred Troy must die,
Priam must die and all his people with him,
Priam who hurls the strong ash spear . . .
Even so,
it is less the pain of the Trojans still to come
that weighs me down, not even of Hecuba herself
or King Priam, or the thought that my own brothers
in all their numbers, all their gallant courage,
may tumble in the dust, crushed by enemies-
That is nothing, nothing beside your agony
when some brazen Argive hales you off in tears,
wrenching away your day of light and freedom!
Then far off in the land of Argos you must live,
laboring at a loom, at another woman's beck and call,
fetching water at some spring, Messeis or Hyperia,
resisting it all the way—
the rough yoke of necessity at your neck.
And a man may say, who sees you streaming tears,
'There is the wife of Hector, the bravest fighter
they could field, those stallion-breaking Trojans,
long ago when the men fought .for Troy.' So he will say
and the fresh grief will swell your heart once more,
widowed, robbed of the one man strong enough
to fight off your day of slavery.
No, no,
let the earth come piling over my dead body
before I hear your cries, I hear you dragged away!"

 

  In the same breath, shining Hector reached down
for his son—but the boy recoiled,
cringing against his nurse's full breast,
screaming out at the sight of his own father,
terrified by the flashing bronze, the horsehair crest,
the great ridge of the helmet nodding, bristling terror-
so it struck his eyes. And his loving father laughed,
his mother laughed as well, and glorious Hector,
quickly lifting the helmet from his head,
set it down on the ground, fiery in the sunlight,
and raising his son he kissed him, tossed him in his arms,
lifting a prayer to Zeus and the other deathless gods:
"Zeus, all you immortals! Grant this boy, my son,
may be like me, first in glory among the Trojans,
strong and brave like me, and rule all Troy in power
and one day let them say, 'He is a better man than his father!'—
when he comes home from battle bearing the bloody gear
of the mortal enemy he has killed in war—
a joy to his mother's heart."
So Hector prayed
and placed his son in the arms of his loving wife.
Andromache pressed the child to her scented breast,
smiling through her tears. Her husband noticed,
and filled with pity now, Hector stroked her gently,
trying to reassure her, repeating her name: "Andromache,
dear one, why so desperate? Why so much grief for me?
No man will hurl me down to Death, against my fate.
And fate? No one alive has ever escaped it,
neither brave man nor coward, I tell you—
it's born with us the day that we are born.
So please go home and tend to your own tasks,
the distaff and the loom, and keep the women
working hard as well. As for the fighting,
men will see to that, all who were born in Troy
but I most of all."
  Hector aflash in arms
took up his horsehair-crested helmet once again.
And his loving wife went home, turning, glancing
back again and again and weeping live warm tears.
She quickly reached the sturdy house of Hector,
man-killing Hector,
and found her women gathered there inside
and stirred them all to a high pitch of mourning.
So in his house they raised the dirges for the dead,
for Hector still alive, his people were so convinced
that never again would he come home from battle,
never escape the Argives' rage and bloody hands.

 

  Nor did Paris linger long in his vaulted halls.
Soon as he buckled on his elegant gleaming bronze
he rushed through Troy, sure in his racing stride.
As a stallion full-fed at the manger, stalled too long,
breaking free of his tether gallops down the plain,
out for his favorite plunge in a river's cool currents,
thundering in his pride-his head flung back, his mane
streaming over his shoulders, sure and sleek in his glory,
knees racing him on to the fields and stallion-haunts he loves—
so down from Pergamus heights came Paris, son of Priam,
glittering in his armor like the sun astride the skies,
exultant, laughing aloud, his fast feet sped him on.
Quickly he overtook his brother, noble Hector
still lingering, slow to turn from the spot
where he had just confided in his wife . . .
Magnificent Paris spoke first: "Dear brother,
look at me, holding you back in all your speed—
dragging my feet; coming to you so late,
and you told me to be quick!"

 

  A flash of his helmet as Hector shot back,
"Impossible man! How could anyone fair and just
underrate your work in battle? You're a good soldier.
But you hang back of your own accord, refuse to fight.
And that, that's why the heart inside me aches
when I hear our Trojans heap contempt on you,
the men who bear such struggles all for you.
Come,
now for attack! We'll set all this to rights,
someday, if Zeus will ever let us raise
the winebowl of freedom high in our halls,
high to the gods of cloud and sky who live forever—
once we drive these Argives geared for battle out of Troy!"

Vaunting, aflash in arms, Hector swept through the gates
with his brother Paris keeping pace beside him.
Both men bent on combat, on they fought like wind
when a god sends down some welcome blast to sailors
desperate for it, worked to death at the polished oars,
beating the heavy seas, their arms slack with the labor-
so welcome that brace of men appeared to the Trojans
desperate for their captains.
Each one killed his man.
Paris took Menesthius, one who had lived in Arne,
a son of King Areithous lord of the war-club
and his lady Phylomedusa with large lovely eyes.
Hector slashed Eioneus' throat with a sharp spear,
ripped him under the helmet's hammered bronze rim-
his legs collapsed in death.
Quick in the jolting onset
Lycia's captain Glaucus son of Hippolochus skewered
Dexius' son Iphinous just as he leapt behind
his fast mares-he stabbed his shoulder, hard,
and down from his car Iphinous crashed to earth
and his limbs went slack with death.
Rampaging Trojans!
Yes, but as soon as fiery-eyed Athena marked them
killing Argive ranks in this all-out assault,
down she rushed from the peaks of Mount Olympus
straight for sacred Troy. But Phoebus Apollo
spotting her from Pergamus heights-the god grim set
on victory for the Trojans-rose to intercept her . . .
As the two came face-to-face beside the great oak,
lord Apollo the son of Zeus led off, "What next?—
what is the mighty Zeus's daughter blazing after now?
Down from Olympus, what heroics stir your heart?
No doubt you'll hand your Argives victory soon,
you'll turn the tide of battle!
You have no mercy, none for dying Trojans.
Come, listen to me-my plan is so much better:
let us halt the war and the heat of combat now,
at least for today. They'll fight again tomorrow,
until they win their way to the fixed doom of Troy,
since that is your only passion-you two goddesses—
to plunder Troy to rubble."
Athena's eyes lit up
and the goddess said, "So be it, archer of the sky!
Those were my very thoughts, winging down from Olympus
into the midst of Trojans and Achaeans. But tell me,
how do you hope to stop the men from fighting?"

 

"Hector!"—lord Apollo the son of Zeus replied-
"We'll spur his nerve and strength, that breaker of horses,
see if he'll challenge one of the Argives man-to-man
and they will duel in bloody combat to the death.
Achaeans armed in bronze will thrill to his call,
they'll put up a man to battle shining Hector."

 

  So Apollo staged the action. Her eyes afire
the goddess Pallas did not resist a moment.
She flashed the word in Helens' mantic spirit-
the son of Priam sensed what pleased the immortals
hatching instant plans, and coming up to Hector
advised him quickly, "Hector, son of Priam,
a mastermind like Zeus, listen to me now-
let your brother guide you.
Have all Trojans and Argives take their seats,
and you, you challenge Achaea's bravest man
to duel in bloody combat to the death.
It's not the hour to meet your doom, not yet.
I heard a voice of the gods who live forever."

 

  When Hector heard that challenge he rejoiced
and right in the no man's land along his lines he strode,
gripping his spear mid-haft, staving men to a standstill
while Agamemnon seated his Argives geared for combat.
And Apollo lord of the silver bow and Queen Athena,
for all the world like carrion birds, like vultures,
slowly settled atop the broad towering oak
sacred to Zeus whose battle-shield is thunder,
relishing those men. Wave on wave of them settling,
close ranks shuddering into a dense, bristling glitter
of shields and spears and helmets—quick as a ripple
the West Wind suddenly risen shudders down the sea
and the deep sea swell goes dark beneath its force—
so settling waves of Trojan ranks and Achaeans
rippled down the plain . . .
And Hector rose and spoke between both sides:
"Hear me—Trojans, Achaeans geared for combat!
I'll speak out what the heart inside me urges.
Our oaths, our sworn truce—Zeus the son of Cronus
throned in the clouds has brought them all to nothing
and all the Father decrees is death for both sides at once.
Until you Argives seize the well-built towers of Troy
or you yourselves are crushed against your ships.
But now,
seeing the best of all Achaeans fill your ranks,
let one whose nerve impels him to fight with me
come striding from your lines, a lone champion
pitted against Prince Hector. Here are the terms
that I set forth-let Zeus look down, my witness!
If that man takes my life with his sharp bronze blade,
he will strip my gear and haul it back to his ships.
But give my body to friends to carry home again,
so Trojan men and Trojan women can do me honor
with fitting rites of fire once I am dead.
But if I kill him and Apollo grants me glory,
I'll strip his gear and haul it back to sacred Troy
and hang it high on the deadly Archer's temple walls.
But not his body: I'll hand it back to the decked ships,
so the long-haired Achaeans can give him full rites
and heap his barrow high by the broad Hellespont.
And someday one will say, one of the men to come,
steering his oar-swept ship across the wine-dark sea,
'There's the mound of a man who died in the old days,
one of the brave whom glorious Hector killed.'
So they will say, someday, and my fame will never die."

 

  A hushed silence went through all the Achaean ranks,
ashamed to refuse, afraid to take his challenge . . .
But at long last Menelaus leapt up and spoke,
lashing out at them, groaning, heartsick: "Oh no—
your threats, your bluster—women, not men of Achaea!
What disgrace it will be—shame, cringing shame
if not one Danaan now steps up to battle Hector.
You can all turn to earth and water-rot away!
Look at each of you, sitting there, lifeless,
lust for glory gone. I'll harness up,
I'll fight the man myself. The gods on high-
they hold the ropes of victory in their hands!"

 

  With that he began to don his handsome gear.
And then and there, Menelaus,
the death-stroke would have blazed before your eyes—
dead at the hands of Hector, a far stronger man—
if Argive kings had not leapt up and caught you.
And Atreus' son himself, powerful Agamemnon
seized your right hand, shouting out your name:
"You're mad, my Prince! No need for such an outburst—
get a grip on yourself, distraught as you are.
Just for the sake of rivalry, soldier's pride,
don't rush to fight with a better man, with Hector
the son of Priam. Many others shrink before him.
Even Achilles dreads to pit himself against him
out on the battle lines where men win glory—
Achilles, far and away a stronger man than you.
Go back. Sit down with the comrades you command.
We'll put up another champion to go against this Hector.
Fearless, is he? and never sated with fighting?
He'll gladly sink to a knee and rest, I'd say,
if the man comes through alive
from the fight he begs for, dueling to the death."

 

  Again the iron warrior brought his brother round—
good counsel, fitting too. Menelaus yielded at once.
His aides, elated, lifted the armor off his shoulders.
And then lord Nestor rose and spoke among the men:
"No more-or enormous sorrow comes to all Achaea!
How he would groan at this, the old horseman Peleus,
that fine speaker, the Myrmidons' famed commander.
How he rejoiced that day, questioning me in his halls,
when he learned the blood and birth of all the Argives.
Now if he heard how all cringe in the face of Hector,
time and again he'd stretch his hands to the gods
and pray that life breath would quit his limbs
and sink to the House of Death.
Oh if only—
Father Zeus, Athena, Apollo-I were young again!
Fresh as the day we fought by Celadon's rapids,
our Pylians in platoons against Arcadian spearmen
under Phia's ramparts, round the Iardanus' banks.
When Arcadia's champion Ereuthalion strode forth,
a man like a god for power, his shoulders decked
with King Areithous' armor, massive Areithous . . .
the Great War-club, so they called that hulk,
his men-at-arms and their sashed and lovely women.
He would never fight with a bow or long spear, no,
with his giant iron club he'd break battalions open.
That monster—Lycurgus cut him down by stealth,
not force at all, on a footpath so cramped
his iron club was useless fending off his death.
There-before he could heft it-a sudden lunge
and Lycurgus' spear had run him through the guts.
Flat on his back he went, slamming against the ground
and his killer stripped the armor brazen Ares gave him.
He donned it himself, for years of grueling war,
but then, when Lycurgus grew too old in his halls,
he passed it on to a favorite henchman, Ereuthalion,
and sporting that gear he challenged all our best.
And they, they shook from head to foot, terrified,
none with the nerve to face him then. Only I—
my hardened courage drove me to fight the man
in a hot burst of daring,
and I the youngest trooper of us all . . .
I took him on and Athena gave me glory. By heaven,
Ereuthalion was the biggest, strongest man I ever killed,
the huge lumbering sprawl of him stretching far and wide!
Oh make me young again, and the strength inside me
steady as a rock! Hector with that flashing helmet
would meet his match in combat in a moment.
You, the bravest of all Achaeans—and not one
with the spine to battle Hector face-to-face!"

 

  The old man's taunts brought nine men to their feet.
First by far Agamemnon lord of men sprang up
and following him Tydides, powerful Diomedes,
next. the Great and Little Ajax armed in fury,
Idomeneus after them and Idomeneus' good aide,
Meriones, a match for the butcher god of war,
Eurypylus after them, Euaemon's gallant son,
Thoas son of Andraemon, Odysseus out for exploit:
all were roused to go up against Prince Hector.
Once more the fine old horseman gave commands:
"Now shake the lots for all,
the first to the last man—we'll see who wins.
He's the one to do his Achaean comrades proud,
do himself proud too, if he comes through alive
from the fight that waits him, dueling to the death."

 

  And each soldier scratched his mark on a stone
and threw it into Atrides Agamemnon's helmet.
Fighters prayed. Stretching hands to the gods
a man would murmur, scanning the wide sky,
"Father Zeus, let Ajax win, or Tydeus' son
or the proud king himself of all Mycenae's gold!"

 

  So they prayed as the old horseman shook the lots
and one leapt from the helmet, the one they wanted most—
Great Ajax' lot it was. And the herald took it round
through all the ranks, left to right for luck,
and showed it to all Achaea's bravest men.
None of them knew it, each denied the mark.
But once he'd passed it round and reached the man
who had scratched the stone and thrown it in the helmet—
Ajax bent on glory-out went his hand to take it,
the herald pausing beside him dropped it in
and Ajax knew his mark and thrilled to see it,
flung it down at his feet and shouted, "Friends-
the lot is mine and it fills my heart with joy!
I know I can overpower this dazzling Hector.
But come, while I strap my battle-armor on,
all of you pray to Cronus' son, almighty Zeus.
Pray to yourselves in silence, so Trojans cannot hear—
no, pray out loud!
No one at all to fear. No one can rout me—
his will against my will—not by force,
god knows, and not by a sly maneuver either.
I'm not such a raw recruit, I like to think,
born and bred on Salamis."

 

So Great Ajax vaunted
and men prayed to the son of Cronus, King Zeus.
They'd call out, scanning the wide sky, "Father Zeus—
ruling over us all from Ida, god of greatness, glory!
Now let Ajax take this victory, shining triumph!
But if you love Hector, if you hold him dear,
at least give both men equal strength and glory."
So they prayed
as Ajax harnessed himself in burnished, gleaming bronze
and once he had strapped his legs and chest in armor,
out he marched like the giant god of battle wading
into the wars of men when Zeus drives them hard
to clash and soldier on with heart-devouring hate.
So giant Ajax marched, that bulwark of the Achaeans—
a grim smile curling below his dark shaggy brows,
under his legs' power taking immense strides,
shaking his spear high, its long shadow trailing.
The men of Argos exulted at the sight of him there
but terrible tremors shook each Trojan fighter's knees—
Hector himself, his heart pounding against his ribs.
But how could he shrink before the enemy, slip back
into a crowd of cohorts now? He was the challenger,
he with his lust for battle. Ajax strode on, closing,
bearing his huge body-shield like a rampart, heavy bronze
over seven layers of oxhide. Tychius made it for him,
laboring long, the finest leather-smith by far:
over in Hyle where the master had his home
he crafted that famous gleaming shield for Ajax,
layering seven welted hides of sturdy well-fed bulls
and hammered an eighth layer of bronze to top it off.
And now holding that great shield before his chest
Telamonian Ajax marched right up to Hector,
threatening with his deep resounding voice,
"Hector, now you'll learn, once and for all,
in combat man-to-man, what kind of champions
range the Argive ranks, even besides Achilles,
that lionheart who mauls battalions wholesale.
Off in his beaked seagoing ships Achilles lies,
raging away at Agamemnon, marshal of armies—
but here we are, strong enough to engage you,
and plenty of us too. Come—
lead off, if you can, with all your fighting power!"

 

  A flash of his helmet as. rangy Hector shook his head:
"Ajax, royal son of Telamon, captain of armies,
don't toy with me like a puny, weak-kneed boy
or a woman never trained in works of war!
War—I know it well, and the butchery of men.
Well I know, shift to the left, shift to the right
my tough tanned shield. That's what the real drill,
defensive fighting means to me. I know it all,
how to charge in the rush of plunging horses—
I know how to stand and fight to the finish,
twist and lunge in the War-god's deadly dance.
On guard!
Big and bluff as you are, I've no desire to hit you
sniping in on the sly—
I'd strike you out in the open, strike you now!"
He hurled—
his spear's long shadow flew and it struck Ajax' shield,
that awesome seven-layered buckler, right on the eighth,
the outside layer of bronze that topped it off,
through six hides it tore but the seventh stopped
the relentless brazen point.
But Great Ajax next
dear to the gods he hurled and his spear's shadow flew
and the shaft hit Hector's round shield, hit full center—
straight through the gleaming hide the heavy weapon drove,
ripping down and in through the breastplate finely worked,
tearing the war-shirt, close by Hector's flank it jabbed
but the Trojan swerved aside and dodged black death.
Both seized their lances, wrenched them from the shields
and went for each other now like lions rending flesh
or a pair of wild boars whose power never flags.
Hector stabbed at the buckler, full center too,
not smashing through, the brazen point bent back—
and Ajax lunged at him, thrusting hard at his shield
and the shaft punched through, rammed him back in his fury
and grazed his neck and the dark blood gushed forth.
But not even then did Hector quit the battle . . .
backing, helmet flashing, his strong hand hefting
a rock from the field, dark, jagged, a ton weight—
he hurled it at Ajax, struck the gigantic shield,
seven oxhides thick, struck right on the jutting boss
and the bronze clanged, echoing round and round as Ajax
hoisting a boulder—far larger—wheeled and heaved it,
putting his weight behind it, tremendous force—
and the rock crashed home, Hector's shield burst in,
hit by a millstone-and Hector's fine knees buckled,
flat on his back he went, his shield crushing down on him
swept him off his feet. But Apollo quickly pulled him up-
and now they'd have closed with swords, hacked each other
if heralds of Zeus and men had not come rushing in,
one from the Trojans, one from the armed Achaeans,
Talthybius and Idaeus, both with good clear heads.
Parting them, holding their staffs between both men,
the herald Idaeus, cool, skilled in tactics, urged,
"No more, my sons— don't kill yourselves in combat!
Zeus who marshals the storm cloud loves you both.
You're both great fighters—we all know that full well.
The night comes on at last. Best to yield to night."

 

  But the giant Ajax answered briskly, "Wait,
Idaeus, tell Hector here to call the truce.
Mad for a fight, he challenged all our bravest.
Let him lead off. I'll take his lead, you'll see."

 

  His helmet flashed as Hector nodded: "Yes, Ajax,
since god has given you power, build and sense
and you are the strongest spearman of Achaea,
let us break off this dueling to the death,
at least for today. We'll fight again tomorrow,
until some fatal power decides between our armies,
handing victory down to one side or another. Look,
the night comes at last. Best to yield to night.
So you will bring some joy to Achaea's forces
camped beside their ships, and most of all
to your own troops, the comrades you command.
But I'll go back to the great city of King Priam
and bring some joy to the men of Troy and Trojan women
trailing their long robes. Thankful for my return
they'll go to meet the gods and sing their praises.
Come,
let us give each other gifts, unforgettable gifts,
so any man may say, Trojan soldier or Argive,
'First they fought with heart-devouring hatred,
then they parted, bound by pacts of friendship.' "

 

  With that he gave him his silver-studded sword,
slung in its sheath on a supple, well-cut sword-strap,
and Ajax gave his war-belt, glistening purple.
So both men parted, Ajax back to Achaea's armies,
Hector back to his thronging Trojans—overjoyed
to see. him still alive, unharmed, striding back,
free of the rage and hands of Ajax still unconquered.
They escorted him home to Troy—saved, past all their hopes—
while far across the field the Achaean men-at-arms
escorted Ajax, thrilled with victory, back to Agamemnon.

 

Soon as they had gathered within the warlord's tents
he sacrificed an ox in their midst, a full-grown ox,
five years old, to the towering son of Cronus, Zeus.
They skinned the animal quickly, butchered the carcass,
expertly cut the meat into pieces, pierced them with spits,
roasted them to a turn and pulled them off the fire.
The work done, the feast laid out, they ate well
and no man's hunger lacked a share of the banquet.
But the lord of far-flung kingdoms, hero Agamemnon,
honored giant Telamonian Ajax first and last
with the long savory cuts that line the backbone.
And when they had put aside desire for food and drink
the old man began to weave his counsel among them:
Nestor was first to speak—from the early days
his plans and tactics always seemed the best.
With good will to the lords he rose and spoke:
"King Agamemnon, chiefs of all the Argives-
how many long-haired Achaeans lie here dead!
And now Ares the slashing god of war has swirled
their dark blood in Scamander's deep clear stream
and their souls have drifted down to the House of Death.
So at dawn you must call a halt to fighting by Achaeans,
form your units, bring on wagons, gather up the dead
and wheel the corpses back with mules and oxen. Then,
at a decent distance from the ships, we burn the bodies,
so every soldier here can carry back the bones
to a dead man's sons when he sails home again.
And let us heap a single great barrow over the pyre,
one great communal grave stretched out across the plain
and fronting it throw up looming ramparts quickly,
a landward wall for ships and troops themselves.
And amidst the wall build gateways fitted strong
to open a clear path for driving chariots through.
And just outside the wall we must dig a trench,
a deep ditch in a broad sweeping ring
to block their horse and men and break their charge—
then these headlong Trojans can never rush our armies."

 

  So he advised. All the warlords sounded their assent.
And now the Trojans collected high on the crest of Troy.
They were shaken, distracted men at Priam's gates
but the clearheaded Anterior opened up among them:
"Hear me, Trojans, Dardans, all our loyal allies,
I must speak out what the heart inside me urges.
On with it—give Argive Helen and all her treasures
back to Atreus' sons to take away at last.
We broke our sworn truce. We fight as outlaws.
True, and what profit for us in the long run?
Nothing—unless we do exactly as I say."

 

  So he pressed the point, then took his seat.
But among them stood magnificent Paris now,
fair-haired Helen's lord, and he came back
with a winging burst in answer: "Stop, Anterior!
No more of your hot insistence—it repels me.
You must have something better than this to say.
But if you are serious, speaking from the heart,
the gods themselves have blotted out your senses.
Now I say this to our stallion-breaking Trojans,
I say No, straight out—I won't give up the woman!
But those treasures I once hauled home from Argos,
I'll return them all and add from my own stores."

 

  With that concession the prince sat down again.
Then Priam the son of Dardanus rose among them,
a man who could match the gods for strong advice,
and with good will toward all he swayed his people:
"Hear me, Trojans, Dardans, all our loyal allies-
I must speak out what the heart inside me urges.
Now take your evening meal throughout the city,
just as you always have, and stand your watches,
each man wide awake. And then, at first light,
let the herald Idaeus go to the beaked ships
and tell the Atridae, Agamemnon and Menelaus,
the offer of Paris who caused our long hard campaign.
Let Idaeus add this too, a good sound proposal:
see if they are willing to halt the brutal war
until we can bum the bodies of our dead.
We'll fight again tomorrow . . .
until some fatal power decides between us both,
handing victory down to our side—or the other."

 

  His people hung on his words and all obeyed the king.
They took their meal by ranks throughout the army.
At first light Idaeus went to the beaked ships
and out on the meeting grounds he found the Argives,
veterans close by the stem of Agamemnon's ship.
Taking his stand, right in the milling troops,
the herald called out in a high, firm voice,
"Son of Atreus! Captains of all Achaeans!
Priam and noble Trojans command me to report,
if it proves acceptable, pleasing to one and all,
the offer of Paris who caused our long hard campaign.
All the treasures that filled his hollow ships
and the prince hauled home to Troy—
would to god he'd drowned before that day!—
he'll return them all and add from his own stores.
But the lawful wife of Menelaus, renowned Menelaus,
he will not give her up, Paris makes that clear,
though all Troy commands him to do precisely that.
They tell me to add this too, a good sound proposal:
if you are willing, come, we'll halt the brutal war
until we can bum the bodies of our dead.
We'll fight again tomorrow—
until some fatal power decides between us both,
handing victory down to one side or the other."
So he spoke
and a hushed silence went through all the ranks.
Finally Diomedes lord of the war cry shouted out,
"No one touch the treasures of Paris, Helen either!
It's obvious—any fool can see it. Now, at last,
the neck of Troy's in the noose—her doom is sealed."

 

  All the Achaean soldiers roared out their assent,
stirred by the stallion-breaking lord's reply,
and King Agamemnon rounded on Idaeus: "There,
there's the Achaeans' answer, Idaeus—a declaration—
you can hear for yourself. It is my pleasure too.
But about the dead, I'd never grudge their burning.
No holding back for the bodies of the fallen:
once they are gone, let fire soothe them quickly.
That is my sworn pledge. Zeus my witness now,
Hera's lord whose thunder drums the sky!"
With that oath
he raised his scepter high in the eyes of all the gods
and Idaeus turned, trailing back to sacred Troy.
There they sat in assembly, Trojans, Dardans,
all collected together, waiting long and tense
for the herald to return. And home Idaeus came,
delivered his message standing in their midst
and they fell to making hurried preparations,
dividing the labors quickly—two detachments,
one to gather the bodies, one the timber.
And far on the other side Achaean troops
came streaming out of the well-benched ships,
some to gather the bodies, some the timber.

 

  Just as the sun began to strike the plowlands,
rising out of the deep calm flow of the Ocean River
to climb the vaulting sky, the opposing armies met.
And hard as it was to recognize each man, each body,
with clear water they washed the clotted blood away
and lifted them onto wagons, weeping warm tears.
Priam forbade his people to wail aloud. In silence
they piled the corpses on the pyre, their hearts breaking,
burned them down to ash and returned to sacred Troy.
And just so on the other side Achaean men-at-arms
piled the corpses on the pyre, their hearts breaking,
burned them down to ash and returned to the hollow ships.

 

  Then with the daybreak not quite risen into dawn,
the night and day still deadlocked, round the pyre
a work brigade of picked Achaeans grouped.
They heaped a single great barrow over the corpse-fire,
one great communal grave stretched out across the plain
and fronting it threw up looming ramparts quickly,
a landward wall for ships and troops themselves,
and amidst the wall built gateways fitted strong
to open a clear path for driving chariots through.
And against the fortress, just outside the wall,
the men dug an enormous trench, broad and deep,
and drove sharp stakes to guard it.
So they labored,
the long-haired Achaeans, while the gods aloft,
seated at ease beside the lord of lightning, Zeus,
gazed down on the grand work of Argives armed in bronze.
Poseidon the god whose breakers shake the land began,
"Father Zeus, is there a man on the whole wide earth
who still informs the gods of all his plans, his schemes?
Don't you see? Look there—the long-haired Achaeans
have flung that rampart up against their ships,
around it they have dug an enormous deep trench
and never offered the gods a hundred splendid bulls,
but its fame will spread as far as the light of dawnl
And men will forget those ramparts I and Apollo
reared for Troy in the old days—
for the hero Laomedon—we broke our backs with labor."

 

  But filled with anger, Zeus who marshals the thunderheads
let loose now: "Unbelievable! God of the earthquake,
you with your massive power, why are you moaning so?
Another god might fear their wall—their idle whim—
one far weaker than you in strength of hand and fury.
Your own fame goes spreading far as the light of dawn.
Come now, just wait till these long-haired Achaeans
sail back in their ships to the fatherland they love,
then batter their wall, sweep it into the salt breakers
and pile over the endless beach your drifts of sand again,
level it to your heart's content—the Argives' mighty wall."

 

  So they conferred together, building their resolve.
The sun went down. The Argives' work was finished.
They slew oxen beside the tents and took their meal.
And the ships pulled in from Lemnos bringing wine,
a big convoy sent across by Euneus, Jason's son
whom Hypsipyle bore the seasoned lord of armies.
An outright gift to Atrides Agamemnon and Menelaus,
Euneus gave a shipment of wine, a thousand measures full.
From the rest Achaean soldiers bought their rations,
some with bronze and some with gleaming iron,
some with hides, some with whole live cattle,
some with slaves, and they made a handsome feast.
Then all that night the long-haired Achaeans feasted
as Trojans and Trojan allies took their meal in Troy.
Yes, but all night long the Master Strategist Zeus
plotted fresh disaster for both opposing armies—
his thunder striking terror—
and blanching panic swept across the ranks.
They flung wine from their cups and wet the earth
and no fighter would dare drink until he'd poured
an offering out to the overwhelming son of Cronus.
Then down they lay at last and took the gift of sleep.

Now as the Dawn flung out her golden robe across the earth
Zeus who loves the lightning summoned all the gods
to assembly on the topmost peak of ridged Olympus.
He harangued the immortals hanging on his words:
"Hear me, all you gods and all goddesses too,
as I proclaim what the heart inside me urges.
Let no lovely goddess—and no god either—
try to fight against my strict decree.
All submit to it now, so all the more quickly
I can bring this violent business to an end.
And any god I catch, breaking ranks with us,
eager to go and help the Trojans or Achaeans—
back he comes to Olympus, whipped by the lightning,
eternally disgraced. Or I will snatch and hurl him
down to the murk of Tartarus half the world away,
the deepest gulf that yawns beneath the ground,
there where the iron gates and brazen threshold loom,
as far below the House of Death as the sky rides over earth—
then he will know how far my power tops all other gods'
Come, try me, immortals, so all of you can learn.
Hang a great golden cable down from the heavens,
lay hold of it, all you gods, all goddesses too:
you can never drag me down from sky to earth,
not Zeus, the highest, mightiest king of kings,
not even if you worked yourselves to death.
But whenever I'd set my mind to drag you up,
in deadly earnest, I'd hoist you all with ease,
you and the earth, you and the sea, all together,
then loop that golden cable round a horn of Olympus,
bind it fast and leave the whole world dangling in mid-air—
that is how far I tower over the gods, I tower over men."

 

  A stunned silence seized them all, struck dumb—
Zeus's ringing pronouncements overwhelmed them so.
But finally clear-eyed Athena rose and spoke:
"Our Father, son of Cronus, high and mighty,
we already know your power, far too well . . .
who can stand against you?
Even so, we pity these Argive spearmen
living out their grim fates, dying in blood.
Yes, we'll keep clear of the war as you command.
We'll simply offer the Argives tactics that may save them—
so they won't all fall beneath your blazing wrath."

 

  Zeus who drives the storm clouds smiled and answered,
"Courage, Athena, third-born of the gods, dear child.
Nothing I said was meant in earnest—trust me,
I mean you all the good will in the world."
With that,
he harnessed his bronze-hoofed horses onto his battle-car,
his pair that raced the wind with their golden manes
streaming on behind them, and strapping golden armor
around his body, Zeus himself took up his whip
that coils lithe and gold and climbed aboard.
A crack of the lash—the team plunged to a run
and on the stallions flew, holding nothing back
as they winged between the earth and starry skies
and gaining the slopes of Ida with all her springs,
the mother of wild beasts, they reached Gargaron peak
where the grove of Zeus and Zeus's smoking altar stand.
There the father of men and gods reined in his team,
set them free and around them poured a dense mist.
And Zeus assumed his throne on the mountaintop,
exulting in all his glory, gazing out over
the city walls of Troy and the warships of Achaea.

 

  Quickly the long-haired Achaeans took their meal
throughout the shelters, then they armed at once.
And on their side the Trojans put on harness too,
mustering throughout the city, a smaller force
but nerved to engage in combat even so--
necessity pressed them to fight for sons and wives.
All the gates flung wide and the Trojan mass surged out,
horses, chariots, men on foot—a tremendous roar went up.

 

  And now as the armies clashed at one strategic point
they slammed their shields together, pike scraped pike
with the grappling strength of fighters armed in bronze
and their round shields' bosses pounded hide-to-hide
and the thunder of struggle roared and rocked the earth.
Screams of men and cries of triumph breaking in one breath,
fighters killing, fighters killed, and the ground streamed blood.

 

  As long as morning rose and the blessed day grew stronger,
the weapons hurtled side-to-side and men kept falling.
But once the sun stood striding at high noon,
then Father Zeus held out his sacred golden scales:
in them he placed two fates of death that lays men low—
one for the Trojan horsemen, one for Argives armed in bronze—
and gripping the beam mid-haft the Father raised it high
and down went Achaea's day of doom, Achaea's fate
settling down on the earth that feeds us all
as the fate of Troy went lifting toward the sky.
And Zeus let loose a huge crash of thunder from Ida,
hurling his bolts in a flash against Achaea's armies.
The men looked on in horror. White terror seized them all.

 

  Neither Idomeneus nor Agamemnon dared stand his ground,
nor did the Great and Little Ajax, old campaigners,
Nestor alone held out,
the noble horseman, Achaea's watch and ward,
but not of his own will. One horse was finished,
hit by a shaft that fair-haired Helen's lord,
magnificent Paris winged at its brow's high peak
where the forelock crowns the skull—most fatal spot.
It reared in agony, arrow piercing its brain and flung
the team in panic, writhing round the brazen point
as the old horseman hewed the trace-horse clear,
hacked away the straps—sudden strokes of his sword.
But on came Hector's team in the rush-and-buck of battle,
sweeping their driver Hector on in fighting-fury
and then and there old Nestor would have died
if Diomedes had not marked him fast—
the lord of the war cry gave a harrowing shout,
trying to rouse Odysseus: "Where are you running,
the royal son of Laertes, cool tactician?
Turning your back in battle like some coward!
Cutting and running so-take care that no one
spears you in the back! Hold firm with me—
we'll fight this wild maniac off the old man here!"

 

  But long-enduring Odysseus never heard him—
down he dashed to the hollow Argive ships.
So all on his own Diomedes charged the front,
lurched to a halt before old Nestor's team
and winged a flight of orders at the horseman:
"Old soldier, these young fighters wear you down—
your strength goes slack and old age dogs your steps,
your driver's worthless, your horses drag their weight.
Come, up with you now, climb aboard my chariot!
So you can see the breed of Tros's team, their flair
for their own terrain as they gallop back and forth,
one moment in flight, the next in hot pursuit—
I took them both from Aeneas, driving terrors.
Your own good team? Our aides will handle them—
we'll steer these racers straight at the Trojans now,
the great breakers of horses. We'll let Hector see
if the spear in my hand is mad for bloodshed too!"

 

  And the old charioteer rose to the challenge.
Aides caught his team, Sthenelus, loyal Eurymedon,
as the two commanders boarded Diomedes' car.
Nestor grasped the glistening reins in both fists,
lashed the team and they charged straight at Hector
charging straight at them as Tydides hurled a spear
and missed his man but he picked the driver off,
Eniopeus son of proud Thebaeus gripping the reins—
he slashed him beside the nipple, stabbed his chest
and off the car he pitched, his horses balking, rearing.
There on the spot the man's strength and life collapsed
and blinding grief for his driver overpowered Hector,
stunned for his friend but he left him lying there,
dead, and swept on, out for another hardy driver.
Nor did his team go long without a master,
Hector found one quickly—Iphitus' daring son,
Archeptolemus—mounted him up behind his racers,
thrust the reins in the fighting driver's hands.

 

  Now there would have been havoc, irreversible chaos,
the Trojans penned in the walls of Troy like sheep,
but the father of men and gods was quick to the mark.
A crash of thunder! Zeus let loose a terrific bolt
and blazing white at the hoofs of Diomedes' team
it split the earth, a blinding smoking flash—
molten sulphur exploding into the air,
stallions shying, cringing against the car—
and the shining reins flew free of Nestor's grip
His heart quaking, he cried to Diomedes, "Quick, Tydides,
swing these stallions round and fly! Can't you see?
Victory comes from Zeus but not for you.
He hands the glory to Hector, today at least—
tomorrow it's ours, if he wants to give us glory.
There's not a man alive who can fight the will of Zeus,
even a man of iron—Zeus is so much stronger!"

 

  But Diomedes lord of the war cry answered,
"Right, old soldier—all you say is true.
But here's the grief that cuts me to the quick:
one day this Hector will vaunt among his Trojans,
'Diomedes ran for his ships—I drove him back!'
So he'll boast, I know—
let the great earth gape and take me down that day!"

 

  But the noble horseman Nestor shouted back,
"Nonsense, steady Tydeus' son—such loose talkl
Let Hector call you a coward, scorn your courage--
the Trojan and Dardan troops will never believe him,
nor will the wives of the lusty Trojan shieldsmen, never—
you flung their lords in the dust, laid them low in their prime!"

 

  And with that he swung their racers round, mid-flight,
back again to the rout-Trojans and Hector after them,
shouting their savage cries and pelting both men now
with spears and painful ar ows. Helmet flashing,
rangy Hector hurled a resounding yell: "Diomedes—
once the Danaan riders prized you first of men
with pride of place, choice meats and brimming cups.
Now they will disgrace you, a woman after all.
Away with you, girl, glittering little puppet!
I'll never yield, you'll never mount our towers,
never drag our women back to your ships of war—
I'll pack you off to the god of darkness first!"
Fighting words,
and Diomedes was tom two ways-he'd half a mind
to turn the team and take him face-to-face . . .
Three times Tydides was tempted, heart and soul,
three times from the crags of Ida Zeus let loose his thunder,
the Master Strategist handing down a sign to the Trojans—
victory thunder turning the tide of war their way.
And Hector called to his men in a ringing voice,
"Trojans! Lycians! Dardan fighters hand-to-hand—
now be men, my friends, call up your battle-fury!
The Father nods his head in assent, I see, at last
he grants me glory, triumph—the Argives, bloody death.
Fools, erecting their rampart! Flimsy and futile,
not worth a second thought.
They'll never hold me back in my onslaught now,
with a bound my team will leap that trench they dug.
But soon as I reach their hollow ships, torches—
don't forget now, one of you bring me lethal firel
I'll bum their ships, I'll slaughter all their men,
Argive heroes panicked in smoke along their hulls!"

 

  And with that threat he called out to his horses,
"Golden and Whitefoot, Blaze and Silver Flash!
Now repay me for all the loving care Andromache,
generous Eetion's daughter, showered on you aplenty.
First of the teams she gave you honey-hearted wheat,
she even mixed it with wine for you to drink
when the spirit moved her—before she'd serve me,
though I'm proud to say I am her loving husband.
After them, fast, full gallop! So we can seize
the shield of Nestor—its fame hits the skies,
solid gold, the handgrips and the shield itself—
and strip from the stallion-breaking Diomedes' back
the burnished armor Hephaestus forged with all his skill.
If only we lay our hands on these, I'm filled with hope
they'll take to their racing ships this very night!"

 

  So he gloried but Queen Hera stirred in outrage,
she shook on her throne and Mount Olympus quaked
as she cried in the face of the rugged god Poseidon,
"You ruthless-the Earth-shaker with all your power—
not even a twinge of pity deep inside your heart
for all these Argives dying! The same fighters
who pile your gifts at Aegae port and Helice,
gifts by the shipload, hoards to warm your heart.
And you used to plan their victory! If only we,
we gods who defend the Argives had the will to hurl
the Trojans back and hold off thundering Zeus—
there he would sit and smolder,
throned in desolate splendor up on Ida."

 

  Deeply shaken, the god who rocks the earth replied,
"Hera, what wild words! What are you saying?
I for one have no desire to battle Zeus,
not you and I and the rest of the gods together.
The King is far too strong—he'll crush us all."

 

  So they harangued each other to a standstill.
But as for Achaea's forces, all the ground
that the broad trench enclosed from ships to wall
was crammed with chariots, teams and men in armor
packed into close quarters, yes, and the one man
who packed them there, a match for rushing Ares,
Hector the son of Priam, now Zeus gave Hector glory.
And now he might have gutted the ships with fire,
blazing fire—but Queen Hera impelled Agamemnon,
out on the run already, to go and rouse his men.
He made his way through Achaea's ships and shelters,
flaring his great crimson cape with a strong hand
and stopped at Odysseus' huge black-bellied hull,
moored mid-line so a shout could reach both wings,
upshore to Telamonian Ajax' camp or down to Achilles'—
trusting so to their arms' power and battle-strength
they'd hauled their trim ships up on either flank.
Agamemnon's cry went piercing through the army:
"Shame! Disgrace! You Argives, you degraded—
splendid in battle dress, pure sham!
Where have the fighting taunts all gone? That time
you vaunted you were the finest force on earth--
all that empty bluster you let fly at Lemnos,
gorging yourselves on longhorn cattle meat
and drunk to the full on brimming bowls of wine,
bragging how each man could stand up to a hundred,
no, two hundred Trojan fighters in pitched battle.
Now our whole army is no match for one, for Hector--
he'll gut our ships with blazing fire at any moment!
Father Zeus, when did you ever strike a mighty king
with such mad blindness—then tear away his glory?
Not once,
I swear, did I pass some handsome shrine of yours,
sailing my oar-swept ship on our fatal voyage here,
but on each I burned the fat and thighs of oxen,
longing to raze Troy's sturdy walls to the roots.
So, Father, at least fulfill this prayer for me:
let the men escape with their lives if nothing else—
don't let these Trojans mow us down in droves!"
So he prayed
and the Father filled with pity, seeing Atrides weep.
The god bent his head that the armies must be saved,
not die in blood. That instant he launched an eagle
truest of Zeus's signs that fly the skies-a fawn
clutched in its talons, sprung of a running doe,
but he dropped it free beside the handsome shrine
where Achaean soldiers always sacrificed to Zeus
whose voice rings clear with omens. Seeing the eagle
sent their way from Zeus, they roused their war-lust,
flung themselves on the Trojans with a vengeance.
There,
massed in formation as they were, not a single man
could claim he outstripped Diomedes, Tydeus' son
lashing his high-strung team across the trench
to reach the front and battle hand-to-hand--
the first by far to kill a Trojan captain,
Agelaus the son of Phradmon. He'd just turned
his chariot round in flight and once he'd swerved
Diomedes' spear went punching through his back,
gouging his shoulder blade and driving through his chest—
he spilled from the chariot, armor clanging against him.

 

  Diomedes plowed on and after him came the Atridae,
Agamemnon and Menelaus, following in their wake
the Great and Little Ajax armed in fury,
Idomeneus after them and Idomeneus' good aide,
Meriones, a match for the butcher god of war,
Eurypylus after them, Euaemon's gallant son,
and Teucer came up ninth, tensing his reflex bow
and lurking under the wall of giant Ajax' shield.
As Ajax raised the rim, the archer would mark a target,
shoot through the lines—the man he hit dropped dead
on the spot—and quick as a youngster ducking under
his mother's skirts he'd duck under Ajax' shield
and the gleaming shield would hide him head to toe.

 

  Who was the first Trojan the marksman Teucer hit?
Orsilochus first, then Ormenus, Ophelestes,
Daetor and Chromius, princely Lycophontes,
Polyaemon's son Amopaon and Melanippus too—
corpse on corpse he dropped to the earth that rears us all.
And King Agamemnon, thrilled at the sight of Teucer
whipping arrows off his bow, reaping the Trojan ranks,
strode up and sang his praises: "Teucer, lovely soldier,
Telamon's son, pride of the armies—now you're shooting!
You'll bring a ray of hope to your men, your father too.
He raised you when you were little, a bastard boy,
no matter—Telamon tended you in his own house.
Far off as he is, you'll set him up in glory.
I tell you this, so help me it's the truth:
if Zeus with his storm-shield and Queen Athena
ever let me plunder the strong walls of Troy,
you are the first, the first after myself—
I'll place some gift of honor in your hands,
a tripod, or purebred team with their own car
or a fine woman to mount and share your bed."

 

  And Teucer gave his captain a faultless answer:
"Great field marshal, why bother to spur me on?
I go all-out as it is.
With all the power in me I've never quit,
not from the time we rolled them back to Troy.
I've stalked with my bow and picked them off in packs.
Eight arrows I've let fly, with long sharp barbs,
and all stuck in the flesh of soldiers quick to fight—
but I still can't bring this mad dog Hector down!"

 

  The archer loosed a fresh shaft from the bowstring
straight for Hector, his spirit longing to hit him—
but he missed and cut Gorgythion down instead,
a well-bred son of Priam, a handsome prince,
and the arrow pierced his chest, Gorgythion
whom Priam's bride from Aesyme bore one day,
lovely Castianira lithe as a deathless goddess . . .
As a garden poppy, burst into red bloom, bends,
drooping its head to one side, weighed down
by its full seeds and a sudden spring shower,
so Gorgythion's head fell limp over one shoulder,
weighed down by his helmet.
  Quick with another arrow,
the archer let fly from his bowstring straight for Hector,
his spirit straining to hit him—shot and missed again
as Apollo skewed his shaft—
but he leveled Archeptolemus, Hector's daring driver
charging headlong, caught him square in the chest
beside the nipple and off his car he pitched
as his horses balked, rearing, pawing the air.
There on the spot his strength and life collapsed
and blinding grief for the driver overpowered Hector,
stunned for his friend but he left him lying there
and cried out to his brother Cebriones close by,
"Take the reins!" Cebriones rushed to obey—
but Hector leapt down from the burnished car,
he hit the earth with a yell, seized a rock
and went for Teucer, mad to strike the archer
just plucking a bitter arrow from his quiver,
notching it on the string and drawing back the bow
to his right shoulder, when Hector, helmet flashing,
caught him where the collarbone bridges neck and chest,
the deadliest spot of all. There Hector struck,
hurling the jagged rock at Teucer drawing in fury—
snapped the string and his hand went numb at the wrist,
he dropped to a knee, dazed . . . the bow slipped from his grip.
But giant Ajax would never fail his fallen brother—
he ran to straddle and hide him with his shield
as a brace of comrades shouldered up the fighter:
Echius' son Mecisteus helping good Alastor
bore him back to the hollow warships, groaning hard.

 

  And again the Olympian Father fired up the Trojans
ramming Argives back against their own deep trench.
Hector far in the lead, bristling in all his force
like a hound that harries a wild boar or lion—
hot pursuit, snapping quick at his heels,
hindquarters and flanks but still on alert
for him to wheel and fight—so Hector harried
the long-haired Argives, killing the last stragglers,
man after lagging man and they, they fled in panic.
Back through stakes and across the trench they fled,
and hordes were cut down at the Trojans' hands-the rest,
only after they reached the shipways, stood fast
and shouting out to each other, flung their arms
to all the immortals, each man crying out a prayer.
But Hector swerved his horses round at the trench's edge,
wheeling back and forth, tossing their gorgeous manes,
with Hector's eyes glaring bright as a Gorgon's eyes
or Ares', man-destroying Ares'.
A total rout—
and white-armed Hera saw it, and filled with pity
the goddess' words went winging toward Athena:
"Look, daughter of Zeus whose shield is thunder—
don't we care for them any longer? All our Argives
dying there in droves! This is our last chance.
They're filling out their fates to the last gasp,
hacked to pieces under a single man's assault.
This maniac, Hector—I cannot bear him any longer.
Look at the savage slaughter he has made!"
Eyes blazing,
Athena answered, "Let him die a thousand deaths!—
Hector's life and his battle-frenzy blotted out
by the Argives here on Hector's native soil.
But Father rages now, that hard black heart,
always the old outrage, dashing all my plans!
Not a thought for the many times I saved his son
Heracles, worked to death by the labors of Eurystheus.
How he would whine to the high skies-till Father Zeus
would rush me down from the clouds to save his life.
If only I'd foreseen all this, I and my cunning—
that day Eurystheus sent him down to Death,
to the lord who guards the gates, to drag up
from the dark world the hound of grisly Death—
he would never have fled the steep cascading Styx.
But Zeus hates me now. He fulfills the plans of Thetis
who cupped his chin in her hand and kissed his knees,
begging Zeus to exalt Achilles scourge of cities.
But the day will come when Father, well I know,
calls me his darling gray-eyed girl again.
So now you harness the racing team for us
while I go into the halls of storming Zeus
and buckle on my gear and arm for combat.
Now I'll see if Hector, for all his flashing helmet,
leaps for joy when the two of us come blazing forth
on the passageways of battle—or one of his Trojans too
will glut the dogs and birds with his fat and flesh,
brought down in blood against the Argive ships!"

 

  The white-armed goddess Hera could not resist.
Hera queen of the gods, daughter of giant Cronus
launched the work, harnessed the golden-bridled team
while Athena, child of Zeus whose shield is thunder,
letting fall her supple robe at the Father's threshold—
rich brocade, stitched with her own hands' labor—
donned the battle-shirt of the lord of lightning,
buckled her breastplate geared for wrenching war.
Then onto the flaming chariot Pallas set her feet
and seized her spear—weighted, heavy, the massive shaft
she wields to break the battle lines of heroes
the mighty Father's daughter storms against.
A crack of the whip—
the goddess Hera lashed the team, and all on their own force
the gates of heaven thundered open, kept by the Seasons,
guards of the vaulting sky and Olympus heights empowered
to spread the massing clouds or close them round once more,
and straight through the great gates she drove the team.

 

  But as Father Zeus caught sight of them from Ida
the god broke into a sudden rage and summoned iris
to run a message on with a rush of golden wings:
"Quick on your way now, Iris, shear the wind!
Turn them back, don't let them engage me here.
What an indignity for us to clash in arms.
I tell you this and I will fulfill it too:
I'll maim their racers for them,
right beneath their yokes, and those two goddesses,
I'll hurl them from their chariot, smash their car,
and not once in the course of ten slow wheeling years
will they heal the wounds my lightning bolt rips open.
So that gray-eyed girl of mine may learn what it means
to fight against her Father. But with Hera, though,
I am not so outraged, so irate—it's always her way
to thwart my will, whatever I command."
So he thundered
and Iris ran his message, racing with gale force
away from the peaks of Ida up to steep Olympus
cleft and craggy. There at the outer gates
she met them face-to-face and blocked their path,
sounding Zeus's orders: "Where are you rushing now?
What is this madness blazing in your hearts?
Zeus forbids you to fight for Achaea's armies!
Here is Father's threat—he will fulfill it too:
he'll maim your racers for you,
right beneath their yokes, and you two goddesses,
he'll hurl you from your chariot, smash your car,
and not once in the course of ten slow wheeling years
will you heal the wounds his lightning bolt rips open!
So you, his gray-eyed girl, may learn what it means
to fight against your Father. But with Hera, though,
he is not so outraged, so irate-it's always your way
to thwart his will, whatever Zeus commands. You,
you insolent brazen bitch—you really dare
to shake that monstrous spear in Father's face?"

 

  And Iris racing the wind went veering past
and Hera turned to Pallas, calling off the conflict:
"Enough. Daughter of Zeus whose shield is thunder,
I cannot let us battle the Father any longer,
not for mortal men . . .
Men—let one of them die, another live,
however their luck may run. Let Zeus decide
the fates of the men of Troy and men of Argos both,
to his deathless heart's content—that is only right."

 

  So she complied and turned their racers back.
The Seasons loosed the purebred sleek-maned team,
tethered them to their stalls, piled on ambrosia
and leaned the chariot up against the polished walls
that shimmered in the sun. The goddesses themselves
sat down on golden settles, mixing with the immortals,
Athena and Hera's hearts within them dashed.
At the same time
Zeus the Father whipped his team and hurtling chariot
straight from Ida to Mount Olympus, soon to reach
the sessions of the gods. Quick at Zeus's side
the famous lord of earthquakes freed the team,
canted the battle-chariot firmly on its base
and wrapped it well with a heavy canvas shroud.
Thundering Zeus himself assumed his golden throne
as the massive range of Olympus shook beneath his feet.
Those two alone, Athena and Hera, sat apart from Zeus—
not a word would they send his way, not a question.
But the Father knew their feelings deep within his heart
and mocked them harshly: "Why so crushed, Athena, Hera?
Not overly tired, I trust, from all your efforts
there in glorious battle, slaughtering Trojans,
the men you break with all your deathless rage.
But I with my courage, my hands, never conquered--
for all their force not all the gods on Olympus heights
could ever turn me back. Ah but the two of you—
long ago the trembling shook your glistening limbs
before you could glimpse the horrid works of war.
I tell you this, and it would have come to pass:
once my lightning had blasted you in your chariot,
you could never have returned to Mount Olympus
where the immortals make their home."
So he mocked
as Athena and Queen Hera muttered between themselves,
huddled together, plotting Troy's destruction.
True, Athena held her peace and said nothing . . .
smoldering at the Father, seized with wild resentment.
But Hera could hold the anger in her breast no longer,
suddenly bursting out, "Dread majesty, son of Cronus,
what are you saying? We already know your power,
far too well . . . who can stand against you?
Even so, we pity these Argive spearmen
living out their grim fates, dying in blood.
Yes, we'll keep clear of the war as you command.
We'll simply offer the Argives tactics that may save them--
so they won't all fall beneath your blazing wrath."

 

  And Zeus who marshals the thunderheads replied,
"Tomorrow at dawn's your chance, my ox-eyed queen.
Look down then, if you have the taste for it, Hera,
and you will see the towering son of Cronus killing
still more hordes, whole armies of Argive soldiers.
This powerful Hector will never quit the fighting,
not till swift Achilles rises beside the ships
that day they battle against the high stems,
pinned in the fatal straits
and grappling for the body of Patroclus.
So runs the doom of Zeus.
  You and your anger—
rage away! I care nothing for that. Not even
if you go plunging down to the pit of earth and sea
where Cronus and Iapetus make their beds of pain,
where not a ray of the Sun can warm their hearts,
not a breeze, the depths of Tartarus wall them round.
Not if you ventured down as far as the black abyss Itself—
I care nothing for you, you and your snarling anger,
none in the world a meaner bitch than you."
So he erupted
but the white-armed goddess Hera answered not a word . . .
Now down in the Ocean sank the fiery light of day,
drawing the dark night across the grain-giving earth.
For the men of Troy the day went down against their will
but not the Argives—what a blessing, how they prayed
for the nightfall coming on across their lines.

 

  But again, still bent on glory, Hector mustered
his Trojan cohorts, pulled them back from the ships
toward the river rapids, to wide open ground
where they found a sector free and clear of corpses.
They swung down from their chariots onto earth
to hear what Hector dear to Zeus commanded now.
He clutched a thrusting-lance eleven forearms long;
the bronze tip of the weapon shone before him,
ringed with a golden hoop to grip the shaft.
Leaning on this, the prince addressed his men:
"Hear me, Trojans, Dardans, all our loyal allies!
I had hoped by now, once we destroyed them all—
all the Achaeans and all their hollow ships—
we might turn home to the windy heights of Troy.
But night came on too soon. That's what saved them,
that alone, they and their ships along the churning surf.
Very well then, let us give way to the dark night,
set out our supper, unyoke our full-maned teams
and pile the fodder down before their hoofs.
Drive cattle out of the city, fat sheep too,
quickly, bring on rations of honeyed, mellow wine
and bread from the halls, and heap the firewood high.
Then all night long till the breaking light of day
we keep the watch fires blazing, hundreds of fires
and the rising glare can leap and hit the skies,
so the long-haired Achaeans stand no chance tonight
to cut and run on the sea's broad back. Never,
not without a struggle, not at their royal ease
are they going to board those ships! No, no,
let every last man of them lick his wounds—
a memento at home—pierced by arrow or spear
as he vaults aboard his decks. So the next fool
will cringe at the thought of mounting hateful war
against our stallion-breaking Trojans.
Now let heralds
dear to Zeus cry out through the streets of Troy
that boys in their prime and old gray-headed men
must take up posts on the towers built by the gods,
in bivouac round the city. And as for our wives,
each in her own hall must set big fires burning.
The night watch too, it must be kept unbroken,
so no night raiders can slip inside the walls
with our armies camped afield.
  That's our battle-order,
my iron-hearted Trojans, just as I command.
Let the order I issue now stand firm and clear
and the stirring call to arms I sound tomorrow morning,
my stallion-breaking Trojans!
  My hopes are rising now—
I pray to Zeus and the great array of deathless gods
that we will whip the Achaeans howling out of Troy
and drive them off to death, those dogs of war
the deadly fates drove here in their black ships!
So now, for the night, we guard our own positions,
but tomorrow at daybreak, armed to the hilt for battle,
waken slashing war against their hollow hulls.
I'll soon see if the mighty Diomedes rams me
back from the ships and back against our walls
or I kill him with bronze and strip his bloody armor!
Tomorrow Tydeus' son will learn his own strength--
if he has the spine to stand the onrush of my spear.
In the front ranks he'll sprawl, I think, torn open,
a rout of his comrades down around their captain
just as the sun goes rising into dawn. If only
I were as sure of immortality, ageless all my days—
and I were prized as they prize Athena and Apollo—
as surely as this day will bring the Argives death!"

 

  So Hector urged his armies. The Trojans roared assent.
The fighters loosed their sweating teams from the yokes,
tethered them by the reins, each at his own chariot.
They herded' cattle out of the city, fat sheep too,
quickly, brought on rations of honeyed, mellow wine
and bread from the halls, heaped the firewood high
and up from the plain the winds swept the smoke,
the sweetness and the savor swirling up the skies.

 

  And so their spirits soared
as they took positions down the passageways of battle
all night long, and the watchfires blazed among them.
Hundreds strong, as stars in the night sky glittering
round the moon's brilliance blaze in all their glory
when the air falls to a sudden, windless calm . . .
all the lookout peaks stand out and the jutting cliffs
and the steep ravines and down from the high heavens bursts
the boundless, bright air and all the stars shine clear
and the shepherd's heart exults—so many fires burned
between the ships and the Xanthus' whirling rapids
set by the men of Troy, bright against their walls.
A thousand fires were burning there on the plain
and beside each fire sat fifty fighting men
poised in the leaping blaze, and champing oats
and glistening barley, stationed by their chariots,
stallions waited for Dawn to mount her glowing throne.

So the Trojans held their watch that night but not the Achaeans—
godsent Panic seized them, comrade of bloodcurdling Rout:
all their best were struck by grief too much to bear.
As crosswinds chop the sea where the fish swarm,
the North Wind and the West Wind blasting out of Thrace
in sudden, lightning attack, wave on blacker wave, cresting,
heaving a tangled mass of seaweed out along the surf—
so the Achaeans' hearts were torn inside their chests.

 

  Distraught with the rising anguish, Atreus' son
went ranging back and forth, commanding heralds
to sound out loud and clear and call the men to muster,
each by name, but no loud outcry now. The king himself
pitched in with the lead heralds, summoning troops.
They grouped on the meeting grounds, morale broken.
Lord marshal Agamemnon rose up in their midst,
streaming tears like a dark spring running down
some. desolate rock face, its shaded currents flowing.
So, with a deep groan, the king addressed his armies:
"Friends . . . lords of the Argives, all my captains!
Cronus' son has entangled me in madness, blinding ruin—


Zeus is a harsh, cruel god. He vowed to me long ago,
he bowed his head that I should never embark for home
till I had brought the walls of Ilium crashing down.
But now, I see, he only plotted brutal treachery:
now he commands me back to Argos in disgrace,
whole regiments of my men destroyed in battle.
So it must please his overweening heart, who knows?
Father Zeus has lopped the crowns of a thousand cities,
true, and Zeus will lop still more—his power is too great.
So come, follow my orders. Obey me, all you Argives.
Cut and run! Sail home to the fatherland we love!
We'll never take the broad streets of Troy."

 

  Silence held them all, struck dumb by his orders.
A long while they said nothing, spirits dashed.
Finally Diomedes lord of the war cry broke forth:
"Atrides—I will be first to oppose you in your folly,
here in assembly, King, where it's the custom.
Spare me your anger. My courage-
mine was the first you mocked among the Argives,
branding me a coward, a poor soldier. Yes, well,
they know all about that, the Argives young and old.
But you—the son of Cronus with Cronus' twisting ways
gave you gifts by halves: with that royal scepter
the Father gave you honor beyond all other men alive
but he never gave you courage, the greatest power of all.
Desperate man! So certain, are you, the sons of Achaea
are cowards, poor soldiers, just because you say so?
Desert—if your spirit drives you to sail home,
then sail away, my King! The sea-lanes are clear,
there are your ships of war, crowded down the surf,
those that followed you from Mycenae, your own proud armada.
But the rest of the long-haired Achaeans will hold out,
right here, until we've plundered Troy. And they,
if they go running home to the land they love,
then the two of us, I and Sthenelus here
will fight our way to the fixed doom of Troy.
Never forget—we all sailed here with god."

 

  And all the Achaeans shouted their assent,
stirred by the stallion-breaking Diomedes' challenge.
But Nestor the old driver rose and spoke at once:
"Few can match your power in battle, Diomedes,
and in council you excel all men your age.
So no one could make light of your proposals,
not the whole army—who could contradict you?
But you don't press on and reach a useful end.
How young you are . . . why, you could be my son,
my youngest-born at that, though you urge. our kings
with cool clear sense: what you've said is right.
But it's my turn now, Diomedes.
I think I can claim to have some years on you.
So I must speak up and drive the matter home.
And no one will heap contempt on what I say,
not even mighty Agamemnon. Lost to the clan,
lost to the hearth, lost to the old ways, that one
who lusts for all the horrors of war with his own people.
But now, I say, let us give way to the dark night,
set out the evening meal. Sentries take up posts,
squads fronting the trench we dug outside the rampart.
That's the command I give the younger fighters.
Then,
Atrides, lead the way—you are the greatest king—


spread out a feast for all your senior chiefs.
That is your duty, a service that becomes you.
Your shelters overflow with the wine Achaean ships
bring in from Thrace, daily, down the sea's broad back.
Grand hospitality is yours, you rule so many men.
Come, gather us all and we will heed that man
who gives the best advice. That's what they need,
I tell you—all the Achaeans-good sound advice,
now our enemies, camping hard against the ships,
kindle their watchfires round us by the thousands.
What soldier could warm to that? Tonight's the night
that rips our ranks to shreds or pulls us through."

 

  The troops hung on his words and took his orders.
Out they rushed, the sentries in armor, forming
under the son of Nestor, captain Thrasymedes,
under Ascalaphus, Ialmenus, sons of Ares,
under Meriones, Aphareus and Deipyrus,
under the son of Creon, trusty Lycomedes.
Seven chiefs of the guard, a hundred under each,
fighters marching, grasping long spears in their hands,
took up new positions between the trench and rampart.
There they lit their fires, each man made his meal.

 

  Meanwhile marshal Agamemnon led his commanders,
a file of senior chiefs, toward his own lodge
and set before them a feast to please their hearts.
They reached out for the good things that lay at hand
but when they had put aside desire for food and drink
the old man began to weave his counsel among them:
Nestor was first to speak—from the early days
his plans and tactics always seemed the best.
With good will to the chiefs he rose and spoke,
"Great marshal Atrides, lord of men Agamemnon . . .
with you I will end, my King, with you I will begin,
since you hold sway over many warriors, vast armies,
and Zeus has placed in your hands the royal scepter
and time-honored laws, so you will advise them well.
So you above all must speak your mind, and listen,
and carry out the next man's counsel too,
whenever his spirit leads him on to speak
for the public good. Credit will go to you
for whatever he proposes.
Now I will tell you what seems best to me.
No one will offer a better plan than this . . .
the plan I still retain, and I've been forming,
well, for a good long while now, from the very day
that you, my illustrious King, infuriated Achilles—
you went and took from his tents the girl Briseis,
and not with any applause from us, far from it:
I for one, I urged you against it, strenuously.
But you, you gave way to your overbearing anger,
disgraced a great man the gods themselves esteem—
you seized his gift of honor and keep her still.
But even so, late as it is, let us contrive
to set all this to rights, to bring him round
with gifts of friendship and warm, winning words."

 

  And Agamemnon the lord of men consented quickly:
"That's no lie, old man—a full account you give
of all my acts of madness. Mad, blind I was!
Not even I would deny it.
Why look, that man is worth an entire army,
the fighter Zeus holds dear with all his heart—
how he exalts him now and mauls Achaea's forces!
But since I was blinded, lost in my own inhuman rage,
now, at last, I am bent on setting things to rights:
I'll give a priceless ransom paid for friendship.
Here,
before you all, I'll name in full the splendid gifts I offer.
Seven tripods never touched by fire, ten bars of gold,
twenty burnished cauldrons, a dozen massive stallions,
racers who earned me trophies with their speed.
He is no poor man who owns what they have won,
not strapped for goods with all that lovely gold—
what trophies those high-strung horses carried off for me!
Seven women I'll give him, flawless, skilled in crafts,
women of Lesbos—the ones I chose, my privilege,
that day he captured the Lesbos citadel himself:
they outclassed the tribes of women in their beauty.
These I will give, and along with them will go
the one I took away at first, Briseus' daughter,
and I will swear a solemn, binding oath in the bargain:
I never mounted her bed, never once made love with her—
the natural thing for mankind, men and women joined.
Now all these gifts will be handed him at once.
But if, later, the gods allow us to plunder
the great city of Priam, let him enter in
when we share the spoils, load the holds of his ship
with gold and bronze—as much as his heart desires—
and choose for his pleasure twenty Trojan women
second only to Argive Helen in their glory.
And then, if we can journey home to Achaean Argos,
pride of the breasting earth, he'll be my son-by-marriage!
I will even honor him on a par with my Orestes,
full-grown by now, reared in the lap of luxury.
Three daughters are mine in my well-built halls—
Chrysothemis and Laodice and Iphianassa—
and he may lead away whichever one he likes,
with no bride-price asked, home to Peleus' house.
And I will add a dowry, yes, a magnificent treasure
the likes of which no man has ever offered with his daughter!
Seven citadels I will give him, filled with people,
Cardamyle, Enope, and the grassy slopes of Hire,
Pherae the sacrosanct, Anthea deep in meadows,
rolling Aepea and Pedasus green with vineyards.
All face the sea at the far edge of sandy Pylos
and the men who live within them, rich in sheep-flocks,
rich in shambling cattle, will honor him like a god
with hoards of gifts and beneath his scepter's sway
live out his laws in sleek and shining peace.
All this—
I would extend to him if he will end his anger.
Let him submit to me! Only the god of death
is so relentless, Death submits to no one
so mortals hate him most of all the gods.
Let him bow down to me! I am the greater king,
I am the elder-born, I claim—the greater man."

 

  Nestor the noble charioteer embraced his offer:
"Generous marshal Atrides, lord of men Agamemnon!
No one could underrate these gifts of yours, not now,
the treasure trove you offer Prince Achilles.
Come—we'll send a detail of picked men.
They'll go to Achilles' tent with all good speed.
Quick, whomever my eye will light on in review,
the mission's theirs. And old Phoenix first--
Zeus loves the man, so let him lead the way.
Then giant Ajax and tactful royal Odysseus.
Heralds? Odius and Eurybates, you escort them.
Water for their hands! A reverent silence now . . .
a prayer to Zeus. Perhaps he'll show us mercy."

 

  The brisk commands he issued pleased them all.
Heralds brought the water at once and rinsed their hands,
and the young men brimmed the mixing bowls with wine
and tipping first drops for the god in every cup
they poured full rounds for all. Libations finished,
each envoy having drunk to his heart's content,
the party moved out from Atrides' shelters.
Nestor the old driver gave them marching orders—
a sharp glance at each, Odysseus most of all:
"Try hard now, bring him round-invincible Achilles!"

 

  So Ajax and Odysseus made their way at once
where the battle lines of breakers crash and drag,
praying hard to the god who moves and shakes the earth
that they might bring the proud heart of Achilles
round with speed and ease.
Reaching the Myrmidon shelters and their ships,
they found him there, delighting his heart now,
plucking strong and clear on the fine lyre—
beautifully carved, its silver bridge set firm—
he won from the spoils when he razed Eetion's city.
Achilles was lifting his spirits with it now,
singing the famous deeds of fighting heroes . . .
Across from him Patroclus sat alone, in silence,
waiting for Aeacus' son to finish with his song.
And on they came, with good Odysseus in the lead,
and the envoys stood before him. Achilles, startled,
sprang to his feet, the lyre still in his hands,
leaving the seat where he had sat in peace.
And seeing the men, Patroclus rose up too
as the famous runner called and waved them on:
"Welcome! Look, dear friends have come our way—
I must be sorely needed now—my dearest friends
in all the Achaean armies, even in my anger."

 

  So Prince Achilles hailed and led them in,
sat them down on settles with purple carpets
and quickly told Patroclus standing by, "Come,
a bigger winebowl, son of Menoetius, set it here.
Mix stronger wine. A cup for the hands of each guest—
here beneath my roof are the men I love the most."

 

  He paused. Patroclus obeyed his great friend,
who put down a heavy chopping block in the firelight
and across it laid a sheep's chine, a fat goat's
and the long back cut of a full-grown pig,
marbled with lard. Automedon held the meats
while lordly Achilles carved them into quarters,
cut them well into pieces, pierced them with spits
and Patroclus raked the hearth, a man like a god
making the fire blaze. Once it had burned down
and the flames died away, he scattered the coals
and stretching the spitted meats across the embers,
raised them onto supports and sprinkled clean pure salt.
As soon as the roasts were done and spread on platters,
Patroclus brought the bread, set it out on the board
in ample wicker baskets. Achilles served the meat.
Then face-to-face with his noble guest Odysseus
he took his seat along the farther wall,
he told his friend to sacrifice to the gods
and Patroclus threw the first cuts in the fire.
They reached out for the good things that lay at hand
and when they had put aside desire for food and drink,
Ajax nodded to Phoenix. Odysseus caught the signal,
filled his cup and lifted it toward Achilles,
opening with this toast: "Your health, Achilles!
We have no lack of a handsome feast, I see that,
either in Agamemnon's tents, the son of Atreus,
or here and now, in yours. We can all banquet here
to our heart's content.
But it's not the flowing feast
that is on our minds, now—no, a stark disaster,
too much to bear, Achilles bred by the gods,
that is what we are staring in the face
and we are afraid. All hangs in the balance now:
whether we save our benched ships or they're destroyed,
unless, of course, you put your fighting power in harness.
They have pitched camp right at our ships and rampart,
those brazen Trojans, they and their far-famed allies,
thousands of fires blaze throughout their armies ...
Nothing can stop them now-that's their boast--
they'll hurl themselves against our blackened hulls.
And the son of Cronus sends them signs on the right,
Zeus's firebolts flashing. And headlong Hector,
delirious with his strength, rages uncontrollably,
trusting to Zeus—no fear of man or god, nothing--
a powerful rabid frenzy has him in its grip!
Hector prays for the sacred Dawn to break at once,
he threatens to lop the high horns of our stems
and gut our ships with fire, and all our comrades
pinned against the hulls, panicked by thick smoke,
he'll rout and kill in blood!
A nightmare—I fear it, with all my heart—
I fear the gods will carry out his threats
and then it will be our fate to die in Troy,
far from the stallion-land of Argos . . .
Up with you—
now, late as it is, if you want to pull our Argives,
our hard-hit armies, clear of the Trojan onslaught.
Fail us now? What a grief it will be to you
through all the years to come. No remedy,
no way to cure the damage once it's done.
Come, while there's still time, think hard:
how can you fight off the Argives' fatal day?
Oh old friend, surely your father Peleus urged you,
that day he sent you out of Phthia to Agamemnon,
'My son, victory is what Athena and Hera will give,
if they so choose. But you, you hold in check
that proud, fiery spirit of yours inside your chest!
Friendship is much better. Vicious quarrels are deadly—
put an end to them, at once. Your Achaean comrades,
young and old, will exalt you all the more.'
That was your aged father's parting advice.
It must have slipped your mind.
  But now at last,
stop, Achilles-let your heart-devouring anger go!
The king will hand you gifts to match his insults
if only you'll relent and end your anger . . .
So come then, listen, as I count out the gifts,
the troves in his tents that Agamemnon vows to give you.
Seven tripods never touched by fire, ten bars of gold,
twenty burnished cauldrons, a dozen massive stallions,
racers who earned him trophies with their speed.
He is no poor man who owns what they have won,
not strapped for goods with all that lovely gold—
what trophies those high-strung horses carried off for him!
Seven women he'll give you, flawless, skilled in crafts,
women of Lesbos—the ones he chose, his privilege,
that day you captured the Lesbos citadel yourself:
they outclassed the tribes of women in their beauty.
These he will give, and along with them will go
the one he took away at first, Brjseus' daughter,
and he will swear a solemn, binding oath in the bargain:
he never mounted her bed, never once made love with her ...
the natural thing, my lord, men and women joined.
Now all these gifts will be handed you at once.
But if, later, the gods allow us to plunder
the great city of Priam, you shall enter in
when we share the spoils, load the holds of your ship
with gold and bronze—as much as your heart desires—
and choose for your pleasure twenty Trojan women
second only to Argive Helen in their glory.
And then, if we can journey home to Achaean Argos,
pride of the breasting earth, you'll be his son-by-marriage . . .
He will even honor you on a par with his Orestes,
full-grown by now, reared in the lap of luxury.
Three daughters are his in his well-built halls,
Chrysothemis and Laodice and Iphianassa—
and you may lead away whichever one you like,
with no bride-price asked, home to Peleus' house.
And he will add a dowry, yes, a magnificent treasure
the likes of which no man has ever offered with his daughter . . .
Seven citadels he will give you, filled with people,
Cardamyle, Enope, and the grassy slopes of Hire,
Pherae the sacrosanct, Anthea deep in meadows,
rolling Aepea and Pedasus green with vineyards.
All face the sea at the far edge of sandy Pylos
and the men who live within them, rich in sheep-flocks,
rich in shambling cattle, will honor you like a god
with hoards of gifts and beneath your scepter's sway
live out your laws in sleek and shining peace.
All this . . .
he would extend to you if you will end your anger.
But if you hate the son of Atreus all the more,
him and his troves of gifts, at least take pity
on all our united forces mauled in battle here--
they will honor you, honor you like a god.
Think of the glory you will gather in their eyes!
Now you can kill Hector—seized with murderous frenzy,
certain there's not a single fighter his equal,
no Achaean brought to Troy in the ships—
now, for once, you can meet the man head-on!"

 

  The famous runner Achilles rose to his challenge:
"Royal son of Laertes, Odysseus, great tactician . ..  
I must say what I have to say straight out,
must tell you how I feel and how all this will end—
so you won't crowd around me, one after another,
coaxing like a murmuring clutch of doves.
I hate that man like the very Gates of Death
who says one thing but hides another in his heart.
I will say it outright. That seems best to me.
Will Agamemnon win me over? Not for all the world,
nor will all the rest of Achaea's armies.
No, what lasting thanks in the long run
for warring with our enemies, on and on, no end?
One and the same lot for the man who hangs back
and the man who battles hard. The same honor waits
for the coward and the brave. They both go down to Death,
the fighter who shirks, the one who works to exhaustion.
And what's laid up for me, what pittance? Nothing—
and after suffering hardships, year in, year out,
staking my life on the mortal risks of war.

 

  Like a mother bird hurrying morsels back
to her unfledged young-whatever she can catch—
but it's all starvation wages for herself.
So for me.
Many a sleepless night I've bivouacked in harness,
day after bloody day I've hacked my passage through,
fighting other soldiers to win their wives as prizes.
Twelve cities of men I've stormed and sacked from shipboard,
eleven I claim by land, on the fertile earth of Troy.
And from all I dragged off piles of splendid plunder,
hauled it away and always gave the lot to Agamemnon,
that son of Atreus—always skulking behind the lines,
safe in his fast ships—and he would take it all,
he'd parcel out some scraps but keep the lion's share.
Some he'd hand to the lords and kings—prizes of honor—
and they, they hold them still. From me alone, Achilles
of all Achaeans, he seizes, he keeps the bride I love ...
Well let him bed her now—
enjoy her to the hilt!
  Why must we battle Trojans,
men of Argos? Why did he muster an army, lead us here,
that son of Atreus? Why, why in the world if not
for Helen with her loose and lustrous hair?
Are they the only men alive who love their wives,
those sons of Atreus? Never! Any decent man,
a man with sense, loves his own, cares for his own
as deeply as I, I loved that woman with all my heart,
though I won her like a trophy with my spear ...
But now that he's tom my honor. from my hands,
robbed me, lied to me—don't let him try me now.
I know him too well—he'll never win me over!
No, Odysseus,
let him rack his brains with you and the other captains
how to fight the raging fire off the ships. Look--
what a mighty piece of work he's done without me!
Why, he's erected a rampart, driven a trench around it,
broad, enormous, and planted stakes to guard it. No use!
He still can't block the power of man-killing Hector!
No, though as long as I fought on Achaea's lines
Hector had little lust to charge beyond his walls,
never ventured beyond the Scaean Gates and oak tree.
There he stood up to me alone one day—
and barely escaped my onslaught.
Ah but now,
since I have no desire to battle glorious Hector,
tomorrow at daybreak, once I have sacrificed
to Zeus and all the gods and loaded up my holds
and launched out on the breakers—watch, my friend,
if you'll take the time and care to see me off,
and you will see my squadrons sail at dawn,
fanning out on the Hellespont that swarms with fish,
my crews manning the oarlocks, rowing out with a will,
and if the famed god of the earthquake grants us safe passage,
the third day out we raise the dark rich soil of Phthia.
There lies my wealth, hoards of it, all I left behind
when I sailed to Troy on this, this insane voyage--
and still more hoards from here: gold, ruddy bronze,
women sashed and lovely, and gleaming gray iron,
and I will haul it home, all I won as plunder.
All but my prize of honor . . .
he who gave that prize has snatched it back again—
what outrage! That high and mighty King Agamemnon,
that son of Atreus!
  Go back and tell him all,
all I say-out in the open too—so other Achaeans
can wheel on him in anger if he still hopes—
who knows?—to deceive some other comrade.
Shameless,
inveterate—armored in shamelessness! Dog that he is,
he'd never dare to look me straight in the eyes again.
No, I'll never set heads together with that man—
no planning in common, no taking common action.
He cheated me, did me damage, wrong! But never again,
he'll never rob me blind with his twisting words again!
Once is enough for him. Die and be damned for all I care!
Zeus who rules the world has ripped his wits away.
His gifts, I loathe his gifts . . .
I wouldn't give you a splinter for that man!
Not if he gave me ten times as much, twenty times over, all
he possesses now, and all that could pour in from the world's end—
not all the wealth that's freighted into Orchomenos, even into Thebes,
Egyptian Thebes where the houses overflow with the greatest troves of treasure,
Thebes with the hundred gates and through each gate battalions,
two hundred fighters surge to war with teams and chariots—
no, not if his gifts outnumbered all the grains of sand
and dust in the earth—no, not even then could Agamemnon
bring my fighting spirit round until he pays me back,
pays full measure for all his heartbreaking outrage!

 

  His daughter . . . I will marry no daughter of Agamemnon.
Not if she rivaled Aphrodite in all her golden glory,
not if she matched the crafts of clear-eyed Athena,
not even then would I make her my wife! No,
let her father pitch on some other Argive—
one who can please him, a greater king than I.
If the gods pull me through and I reach home alive,
Peleus needs no help to fetch a bride for me himself.
Plenty of Argive women wait in Hellas and in Phthia,
daughters of lords who rule their citadels in power.
Whomever I want I'll make my cherished wife—at home.
Time and again my fiery spirit drove me to win a wife,
a fine partner to please my heart, to enjoy with her
the treasures my old father Peleus piled high.
I say no wealth is worth my life! Not all they claim
was stored in the depths of Troy, that city built on riches,
in the old days of peace before the sons of Achaea came—
not all the gold held fast in the Archer's rocky vaults,
in Phoebus Apollo's house on Pytho's sheer cliffs!
Cattle and fat sheep can all be had for the raiding,
tripods all for the trading, and tawny-headed stallions.
But a man's life breath cannot come back again—
no raiders in force, no trading brings it back,
once it slips through a man's clenched teeth.
Mother tells me,
the immortal goddess Thetis with her glistening feet,
that two fates bear me on to the day of death.
If I hold out here and I lay siege to Troy,
my journey home is gone, but my glory never dies.
If I voyage back to the fatherland I love,
my pride, my glory dies . . .
true, but the life that's left me will be long,
the stroke of death will not come on me quickly.

 

  One thing more. To the rest I'd pass on this advice:
sail home now! You will never set your eyes
on the day of doom that topples looming Troy.
Thundering Zeus has spread his hands above her—
her armies have taken heart!
So you go back
to the great men of Achaea. You report my message—
since this is the privilege of senior chiefs—
let them work out a better plan of action,
use their imaginations now to save the ships
and Achaea's armies pressed to their hollow hulls.
This maneuver will never work for them, this scheme
they hatched for the moment as I raged on and on.
But Phoenix can stay and rest the night with us,
so he can voyage home, home in the ships with me
to the fatherland we love. Tomorrow at dawn.
But only if Phoenix wishes.
I will never force the man to go."
He stopped.
A stunned silence seized them all, struck dumb—
Achilles' ringing denials overwhelmed them so.
At last Phoenix the old charioteer spoke out,
he burst into tears, terrified for Achaea's fleet:
"Sail home? Is that what you're turning over in your mind,
my glorious one, Achilles? Have you no heart at all
to fight the gutting fire from the fast trim ships?
The spirit inside you overpowered by anger!
How could I be severed from you, dear boy,
left behind on the beachhead here—alone?
The old horseman Peleus had me escort you,
that day he sent you out of Phthia to Agamemnon,
a youngster still untrained for the great leveler, war,
still green at debate where men can make their mark.
So he dispatched me, to teach you all these things,
to make you a man of words and a man of action too.
Cut off from you with a charge like that, dear boy?
I have no heart to be left behind, not even
if Zeus himself would swear to scrape away
the scurf of age and make me young again . . .
As fresh as I was that time I first set out
from Hellas where the women are a wonder,
fleeing a blood feud with my father, Amyntor,
Ormenus' son. How furious father was with me,
over his mistress with her dark, glistening hair.
How he would dote on her and spurn his wedded wife,
my own mother! And time and again she begged me,
hugging my knees, to bed my father's mistress down
and kill the young girl's taste for an old man.
Mother—I did your bidding, did my work . . .
But father, suspecting at once, cursed me roundly,
he screamed out to the cruel Furies—'Never,
never let me bounce on my knees a son of his,
sprung of his loins!'—and the gods drove home that curse,
mighty Zeus of the Underworld and grim Persephone.
So I, I took it into my head to lay him low
with sharp bronze! But a god checked my anger,
he warned me of what the whole realm would say,
the loose talk of the people, rough slurs of men—
they must not call me a father-killer, our Achaeans!
Then nothing could keep me there, my blood so fired up.
No more strolling about the halls with father raging.
But there was a crowd of kin and cousins round me,
holding me in the house, begging me to stay . . .
they butchered plenty of fat sheep, banquet fare,
and shambling crook-homed cattle, droves of pigs,
succulent, rich with fat—they singed the bristles,
splaying the porkers out across Hephaestus' fire,
then wine from the old man's jars, all we could drink.
Nine nights they passed the hours, hovering over me,
keeping the watch by rounds. The fires never died,
one ablaze in the colonnade of the walled court,
one in the porch outside my bedroom doors.
But then,
when the tenth night came on me, black as pitch,
I burst the doors of the chamber bolted tight
and out I rushed, I leapt the walls at a bound,
giving the slip to guards and women servants.
And away I fled through the whole expanse of Hellas
and gaining the good dark soil of Phthia, mother of flocks,
I reached the king, and Peleus gave me a royal welcome.
Peleus loved me as a father loves a son, I tell you,
his only child, the heir to his boundless wealth,
he made me a rich man, he gave me throngs of subjects,
I ruled the Dolopes, settling down on Phthia's west frontier.
And I made you what you are—strong as the gods, Achilles—
I loved you from the heart. You'd never go with another
to banquet on the town or feast in your own halls.
Never, until I'd sat you down on my knees
and cut you the first bits of meat, remember?
You'd eat your fill, I'd hold the cup to your lips
and all too often you soaked the shirt on my chest,
spitting up some wine, a baby's way . . . a misery.
Oh I had my share of troubles for you, Achilles,
did my share of labor. Brooding, never forgetting
the gods would bring no son of mine to birth,
not from my own loins.
  So you, Achilles—
great godlike Achilles—I made you my son, I tried,
so someday you might fight disaster off my back.
But now, Achilles, beat down your mounting fury!
It's wrong to have such an iron, ruthless heart.
Even the gods themselves can bend and change,
and theirs is the greater power, honor, strength.
Even the gods, I say, with incense, soothing vows,
with full cups poured and the deep smoky savor
men can bring them round, begging for pardon
when one oversteps the mark, does something wrong.
We do have Prayers, you know, Prayers for forgiveness,
daughters of mighty Zeus . . . and they limp and halt,
they're all wrinkled, drawn, they squint to the side,
can't look you in the eyes, and always bent on duty,
trudging after Ruin, maddening, blinding Ruin.
But Ruin is strong and swift—
She outstrips them all by far, stealing a march,
leaping over the whole wide earth to bring mankind to grief.
And the Prayers trail after, trying to heal the wounds.
And then, if a man reveres these daughters of Zeus
as they draw near him, they will help him greatly
and listen to his appeals. But if one denies them,
turns them away, stiff-necked and harsh—off they go
to the son of Cronus, Zeus, and pray that Ruin
will strike the man down, crazed and blinded
until he's paid the price.
Relent, Achilles—you too!
See that honor attend these good daughters of Zeus,
honor that sways the minds of others, even heroes.
If Agamemnon were not holding out such gifts,
with talk of more to come, that son of Atreus,
if the warlord kept on blustering in his anger, why,
I'd be the last to tell you, 'Cast your rage to the winds!
Defend your friends!'—despite their desperate straits.
But now, look, he gives you a trove of treasures
right away, and vows there are more to follow.
He sends the bravest captains to implore you,
leaders picked from the whole Achaean army,
comrades-in-arms that you love most yourself.
Don't dismiss their appeal, their expedition here—
though no one could blame your anger, not before.
So it was in the old days too. So we've heard
in the famous deeds of fighting men, of heroes,
when seething anger would overcome the great ones.
Still you could bring them round with gifts and winning words.
There's an old tale I remember, an ancient exploit,
nothing recent, but this is how it went .: .
We are all friends here—let me tell it now.

 

  The Curetes were fighting the combat-hard Aetolians,
armies ringing Calydon, slaughtering each other,
Aetolians defending their city's handsome walls
and Curetes primed to lay them waste in battle.
It all began when Artemis throned in gold
loosed a disaster on them, incensed that Oeneus
offered her no first fruits, his orchard's crowning glory.
The rest of the gods had feasted full on oxen, true,
but the Huntress alone, almighty Zeus's daughter—
Oeneus gave her nothing. It slipped his mind
or he failed to care, but what a fatal error!
How she fumed, Zeus's child who showers arrows,
she loosed a bristling wild boar, his tusks gleaming,
crashing his savage, monstrous way through Oeneus' orchard,
ripping up whole trunks from the earth to pitch them headlong,
rows of them, roots and all, appleblossoms and all!
But the son of Oeneus, Meleager, cut him down—
mustering hunters out of a dozen cities,
packs of hounds as well. No slim band of men
could ever finish him off, that rippling killer,
he stacked so many men atop the tear-soaked pyre.
But over his body the goddess raised a terrific din,
a war for the prize, the huge beast's head and shaggy hide—
Curetes locked to the death with brave Aetolians.
Now,
so long as the battle-hungry Meleager fought,
it was deadly going for the Curetes. No hope
of holding their ground outside their own city walls,
despite superior numbers. But then, when the wrath
came sweeping over the man, the same anger that swells
the chests of others, for all their care and self-control--
then, heart enraged at his own dear mother Althaea,
Meleager kept to his bed beside his wedded wife,
Cleopatra . . . that great beauty. Remember her?
The daughter of trim-heeled Marpessa, Euenus' child,
and her husband Idas, strongest man of the men
who once walked the earth—he even braved Apollo,
he drew his bow at the Archer, all for Marpessa
the girl with lovely ankles. There in the halls
her father and mother always called Cleopatra Halcyon,
after the seabird's name . . . grieving once for her own fate
her mother had raised the halcyon's thin, painful cry,
wailing that lord Apollo the distant deadly Archer
had whisked her far from Idas.
  Meleager's Cleopatra—
she was the one he lay beside those days,
brooding over his heartbreaking anger.
He was enraged by the curses of his mother,
volleys of curses she called down from the gods.
So racked with grief for her brother he had killed
she kept pounding fists on the earth that feeds us all,
kept crying out to the god of death and grim Persephone,
flung herself on the ground, tears streaking her robes
and she screamed out, 'Kill Meleager, kill my son!'
And out of the world of darkness a Fury heard her cries,
stalking the night with a Fury's brutal heart, and suddenly—
thunder breaking around the gates, the roar of enemies;
towers battered under assault. And Aetolia's elders
begged Meleager, sent high priests of the gods,
pleading, 'Come out now! defend your people now!'—
and they vowed a princely gift.
Wherever the richest land of green Calydon lay,
there they urged him to choose a grand estate,
full fifty acres, half of it turned to vineyards,
half to open plowland, and carve it from the plain.
And over and over the old horseman Oeneus begged him,
he took a stand at the vaulted chamber's threshold,
shaking the bolted doors, begging his own son!
Over and over his brothers and noble mother
implored him—he refused them all the more—
and troops of comrades, devoted, dearest friends.
Not even they could bring his fighting spirit round
until, at last, rocks were raining down on the chamber,
Curetes about to mount the towers and torch the great city!
And then, finally, Meleager's bride, beautiful Cleopatra
begged him, streaming tears, recounting all the griefs
that fall to people whose city's seized and plundered—
the men slaughtered, citadel burned to rubble, enemies
dragging the children, raping the sashed and lovely women.
How his spirit leapt when he heard those horrors—
and buckling his gleaming armor round his body,
out he rushed to war. And so he saved them all
from the fatal day, he gave way to his own feelings,
but too late. No longer would they make good the gifts,
those troves of gifts to warm his heart, and even so
he beat off that disaster . . . empty-handed.

 

  But you, you wipe such thoughts from your mind.
Don't let your spirit turn you down that path, dear boy.
Harder to save the warships 'once they're up in flames.
Now—while the gifts still wait—go out and fight!
Go—the Achaeans all will honor you like a god!
But enter this man-killing war without the gifts—
your fame will flag, no longer the same honor,
even though you hurl the Trojans home!"

 

  But the swift runner Achilles answered firmly,
"Phoenix, old father, bred and loved by the gods,
what do I need with honor such as that?
I say my honor lies in the great decree of Zeus.
That gift will hold me here by the beaked ships
as long as the life breath remains inside my chest
and my springing knees will lift me. Another thing—
take it to heart, I urge you. Stop confusing
my fixed resolve with this, this weeping and wailing
just to serve his pleasure, Atreus' mighty son.
It degrades you to curry favor with that man,
and I will hate you for it, I who love you.
It does you proud to stand by me, my friend,
to attack the man who attacks me—
be king on a par with me, take half my honors!
These men will carry their message back, but you,
you stay here and spend the night in a soft bed.
Then, tomorrow at first light, we will decide
whether we sail home or hold out here."
With that,
he gave Patroclus a sharp glance, a quiet nod
to pile the bedding deep for Phoenix now,
a sign to the rest to think of leaving quickly.
Giant Ajax rose to his feet, the son of Telamon,
tall as a god, turned and broke his silence:
"Ready, Odysseus? Royal son of Laertes,
great tactician—come, home we go now.
There's no achieving our mission here, I see,
not with this approach. Best to return at once,
give the Achaeans a full report, defeating as it is.
They must be sitting there, waiting for us now.
Achilles—
he's made his own proud spirit so wild in his chest,
so savage, not a thought for his comrades' love—
we honored him past all others by the ships.
Hard, ruthless man . . .
Why, any man will accept the blood-price paid
for a brother murdered, a child done to death.
And the murderer lives on in his own country—
the man has paid enough, and the injured kinsman
curbs his pride, his smoldering, vengeful spirit,
once he takes the price.
  You—the gods have planted
a cruel, relentless fury in your chest! All for a girl,
just one, and here we offer you seven—outstanding beauties—
that, and a treasure trove besides. Achilles,
put some human kindness in your heart.
Show respect for your own house. Here we are,
under your roof, sent from the whole Achaean force!
Past all other men, all other Achaean comrades,
we long to be your closest, dearest friends."

 

  And the swift runner Achilles answered warmly,
"Ajax, royal son of Telamon, captain of armies,
all well said, after my own heart, 'or mostly so.
But my heart still heaves with rage
whenever I call to mind that arrogance of his—
how he mortified me, right in front of the Argives—
that son of Atreus treating me like some vagabond,
like some outcast stripped of all my rights!
You go back to him and declare my message:
I will not think of arming for bloody war again,
not till the son of wise King Priam, dazzling Hector
batters all the way to the Myrmidon ships and shelters,
slaughtering Argives, gutting the hulls with fire.
But round my own black ship and camp this Hector
blazing for battle will be stopped, I trust—
stopped dead in his tracks!"
So he finished.
Then each man, lifting his own two-handled cup,
poured it out to the gods, and back they went
along the ships, Odysseus in the lead.
Patroclus told his friends and serving-women
to pile a deep warm bed for Phoenix, quickly.
They obeyed and spread the bed as he ordered,
with fleeces, woolen throws and soft linen sheets.
There the old man lay, awaiting shining Dawn.
And deep in his well-built lodge Achilles slept
with the woman he brought from Lesbos, Phorbas' daughter,
Diomede in all her beauty sleeping by his side.
And over across from him Patroclus slept
with the sashed and lovely Iphis by his side,
whom Prince Achilles gave him the day he took
the heights of Scyros, Enyeus' rocky stronghold.

 

  But once the envoys reached Atrides' shelters,
comrades leapt to their feet, welcomed them back
and clustering round them, lifted golden cups.
One after another pressed them with questions,
King Agamemnon most urgent of all: "Come—
tell me, famous Odysseus, Achaea's pride and glory—
will he fight the fire off the ships? Or does he refuse,
does rage still grip his proud, mighty spirit?"

 

  And the steady, long-enduring Odysseus replied,
"Great marshal Atrides, lord of men Agamemnon,
that man has no intention of quenching his rage.
He's still bursting with anger, more than ever—
he spurns you, spurns all your gifts. Work out
your own defense, he says, you and your captains
save the Argive armies and the ships. Himself?
Achilles threatens, tomorrow at first light,
to haul his well-benched warships out to sea.
And what's more, he advises all the rest,
'Sail home now. You will never set your eyes
on the day of doom that topples looming Troy.
Thundering Zeus has spread his hands above her . . .
her armies have taken heart.'
  That's his answer.
And here are men to confirm it, fellow envoys.
Ajax and two heralds, both clear-headed men.
But old Phoenix passes the night in camp
as Achilles bids him, so he can voyage home,
home in the ships with him to the fatherland they love.
Tomorrow at dawn. But only if Phoenix wishes.
He will never force the man to go."
So he reported.
Silence held them all, struck dumb by his story,
Odysseus' words still ringing in their ears.
A long while they said nothing, spirits dashed.
Finally Diomedes lord of the war cry broke forth:
"Great marshal Atrides, lord of men Agamemnon—
if only you'd never begged the dauntless son of Peleus,
holding out to Achilles trove on trove of gifts!
He's a proud man at the best of times, and now
you've only plunged him deeper in his pride.
I say have done with the man—
whether he sails for home or stays on here.
He'll fight again—in his own good time-whenever
the courage in him flares and a god fires his blood.
So come, follow my orders. And all of us unite.
Go to sleep now, full to your heart's content
with food and wine, a soldier's strength and nerve.
Then when the Dawn's red fingers shine in all their glory,
quickly deploy your chariots and battalions, Agamemnon,
out in front of the ships-you spur them on
and you yourself, you fight in the front ranks!"

 

  And Achaea's kings all shouted their assent,
stirred by the stallion-breaking Diomedes' challenge.
Pouring cups to the gods, each warlord sought his shelter.
There they spent the night and took the gift of sleep.

So by the ships the other lords of Achaea's armies
slept all night long, overcome by gentle sleep . . .
But not the great field marshal Agamemnon--
the sweet embrace of sleep could not hold him:
his mind kept churning, seething. Like Zeus's bolts
when the lord of bright-haired Hera flashes lightning,
threatening to loose torrential rain or pelting hail
or snow when a blizzard drifts on fields—or driving on,
somewhere on earth, the giant jaws of rending war—
so thick-and-fast the groans came from Atrides,
wrenching his chest, heaving up from his heart
and rocked his very spirit to the core.
Now as he scanned across the Trojan plain
Agamemnon marveled in horror at those fires,
a thousand fires blazing against the walls of Troy,
and the shrill of pipes and flutes and low roar of men.
And now as he glanced back at Achaea's troops and ships
he tore out his hair by the roots, he looked to Zeus on high,
groaning from the depths of his proud, embattled heart.
But soon this recourse struck his mind as best:
he would go and approach the son of Neleus first
and see if Nestor could work out something with him,
some foolproof plan that just might ward disaster
off the Achaean forces.
  He rose up quickly
and over his chest he pulled a battle-shirt,
under his smooth feet he fastened supple sandals,
round him slung the glossy hide of a big tawny lion,
swinging down to his heels, and grasped a spear.

 

  And the same anguish shook Menelaus too—
no sleep could settle over his eyes, not now.
He feared his men might meet the worst at last,
comrades who crossed a waste of seas for him
to raise Troy and mount their fierce assault.
First he covered his broad back with leopard skin,
a fine spotted hide, then lifting a round helmet
of good sturdy bronze, he fitted it to his head,
he took a spear in his grip and off he strode
to rouse his brother, king of all the Argives,
the armies that prized him in his power like a god.
And Menelaus found him alongside his ship's stem,
strapping his handsome gear around his shoulders.
Agamemnon warmed with pleasure as he came up
but Menelaus lord of the war cry ventured first,
"Why arming now, my brother? To spur a volunteer
to spy on Trojan lines? Not a man in sight will take
that mission on, I fear, and go against our enemies,
scout them out alone in the bracing godsent night—
it will take a daring man to do the job."

 

  King Agamemnon answered crisply; "Tactics,
my noble Menelaus. That's what we need now,
you and I both, and cunning tactics too.
Something to shield and save our men and ships
since Zeus's heart has turned—his mighty heart
is set on Hector's offerings more than ours.
I've never seen or heard tell of a single man
wreaking so much havoc in one day as Hector,
Zeus's favorite, wreaks against our troops,
and all on his own-no son of god or goddess.
He's made a slaughter, I tell you. Pain for Achaeans,
enough to last us down the years to come . . .
what blows he's dealt our men!
Go now, call Ajax, Idomeneus, quickly,
make a run for it down along the ships.
I'll go after Nestor, wake and rouse him,
see if the good man wants to join the guard,
that strong contingent, and give them orders.
He's the one they'll obey. His own son commands
the sentry-line, he and Idomeneus' aide Meriones.
They above all—we put those men in charge."

 

  The lord of the war cry nodded, "Yes, fine,
but what orders for me? Do I stay with them,
waiting for you to come? Or follow you on the run,
once I've given the captains your command?"

 

  The marshal made things clearer: "You stay there—
so we don't miss one another rushing back and forth
in the endless maze of pathways up and down the camp.
But shout wherever you go, tell them to stay awake.
And call each man by his name and father's line,
show them all respect. Not too proud now.
We are the ones who ought to do the work.
On our backs, from the day that we were born,
it seems that Zeus has piled his pack of hardships."

 

  With his order clear, he sent his brother off
while he went after Nestor, the old commander.
He found him beside his black ship and shelter,
stretched on a fleecy bed, his blazoned gear at hand,
his shield and two long spears and burnished helmet.
His war-belt lay beside him, gleaming in all its fire.
The old man cinched it on whenever he'd harness up,
marching his men to war where fighters die—
Nestor gave no ground to withering old age.
He propped himself on an elbow, craned his head
and probed sharply, whispering through the dark,
"Who goes there? Stalking along the ships,
alone through camp in the very dead of night
when other mortals try to catch some sleep.
Tracking a stray mule or a lost companion? Speak!
Don't steal on me in silence—what do you want?"

 

  The lord of men Agamemnon reassured him:
"Nestor, son of Neleus, glory of Achaea,
don't you recognize Agamemnon? The one man,
past all others, Zeus has plunged in troubles,
year in, year out, for as long as the life breath
fills my lungs and the spring in my knees will lift me..
I roam this way since sleep won't close my eyes--
war's my worry, the agonies of our Achaeans.
How I fear for our comrades, fear the worst!
My mind is torn, I'm harried back and forth,
the heart inside me pounding through my chest
and the sturdy legs beneath me giving way.
But if you want action now—
sleeping is just as hard for you, it seems—
come, let's go down to the sentry-line and see
if numb with exhaustion, lack of sleep, they've nodded off,
all duty wiped from their minds, the watch dissolved.
Our blood enemies camp hard by. How do we know
they're not about to attack us in the night?"

 

  And the old charioteer warmed to his challenge:
"Great marshal Atrides, lord of men Agamemnon—
Hector and Hector's high hopes? Not a chance.
The plans of Zeus will never bring them off,
those dreams of glory inspiring Hector now.
Oh I think he'll have his troubles to shoulder,
plenty of them too, if Achilles ever turns away
from the heartbreaking anger deep inside him.
Follow you? Surely. Let's wake others also,
Diomedes famed for his spear, Odysseus,
quick Little Ajax and Phyleus' brave son.
And if only one would go and call the rest,
giant Ajax strong as a god and King Idomeneus—
they're hardly close, their ships last on the line.
But I will blame Menelaus, loved as he is and honored,
even if you will wheel on me in anger—I must,
I can't hide it now. How that fellow sleeps!
Turning over the work to you alone.
Now is the time for him to work, to hunt
the leading captains and beg them all for help.
Desperate straits-we can't hold out much longer."

 

  The lord of men replied, "You're right, old soldier.
I'd even urge you to fault him any other day.
So often he hangs back, with no heart for the work,
not that he shrinks from action, skittish or off guard—
it's just that he looks to me, waiting for me
to make the first move. This time, though,
he woke before me, came and roused me first
and I sent him off to call the men you're after.
So let's move out, overtake the rest at the gates,
with the sentries where I ordered them to group."

 

  And Nestor the noble charioteer assented gladly:
"True, when the man leaps in the breach that way
no one can blame or disobey him, no Achaean,
not when he spurs the troops and gives commands."

 

  With that he slipped his tunic over his chest,
under his smooth feet he fastened supple sandals,
pinned with a brooch his crimson cape around him,
flowing in double folds and topped with thick fleece,
and gripping a tough spear tipped with a brazen point,
he strode along the ships of the Argives armed in bronze.
And reaching Odysseus first, a mastermind like Zeus,
the old driver roused him from sleep, shouting out,
"Wake up!" The cry went ringing through his ears
and out of his tent he came, shouting in return,
"Why, why prowling along the ships and camp,
you alone in the bracing godsent night—
what's the crisis now? What trouble's come?"

 

  And Nestor the noble charioteer replied,
"Royal son of Laertes, Odysseus, great tactician,
no time for anger now—
such misery has overcome our Argives.
Follow us, come, so we can wake the next man,
some captain fit to map our strategy here,
whether we break and run or stand and fight."

 

  Backing into his tent, the great tactician slung
his wrought shield on his back and joined the party
striding toward the son of Tydeus, Diomedes.
They found him with all his gear outside his shelter,
cohorts sleeping round him, shields beneath their heads,
spears stuck straight in the ground on butt-end spikes
and the bronze points flashing into the distance
like forked lightning flung by Father Zeus.
But the veteran fighter lay there fast asleep,
the cured hide of a field ox spread beneath him,
a lustrous blanket stretched beneath his head . . .
The old charioteer moved in and woke him roughly,
dug a heel in his ribs, chiding him to his face,
"Up with you, Diomedes! What, sleep all night?
Haven't you heard? Trojans hold the high ground,
over the beachhead there, camped against the ships—
only a narrow strip to keep off sudden death."

 

  So he prodded and Diomedes woke from sleep
with a quick start and burst of winging words:
"A hard man you are, old soldier—hard.
You never give up the good fight, do you?
Where are the younger troopers now we need them?
Why don't they go wake each king in turn--
padding softly up and down through camp?
You, old man, you'd overpower us all!"

 

  And Nestor the noble driver answered warmly,
"Right you are, my friend, straight to the point.
Sons I have, and they're hardy, handsome boys,
and comrades too, men aplenty-one of the lot
could light out now and summon up the kings.
But now a crisis has overwhelmed our armies.,
Our fate, I tell you, stands on a razor's edge:
life or death for Achaea, gruesome death at that.
Up with you! Wake quick Little Ajax, Meges too.
You're so much younger—come, pity an old man."

 

  And round his back Diomedes slung the hide
of a big tawny lion, swinging down to his heels,
he grasped 'a spear and the fighter strode away
and roused those men to leave their beds and march.

 

  And now as they filed among the mustered guard
they found the chief sentries far from sleep—
on the alert, all stationed set with weapons.
Like sheepdogs keeping watch on flocks in folds,
a nervous, bristling watch when the dogs get wind
of a wild beast rampaging down through mountain timber,
crashing toward the pens, and the cries break as he charges,
a din of men and dogs, and their sleep is broken, gone—
and so the welcome sleep was routed from their eyes,
guardsmen keeping the long hard watch that night.
Always turning toward the plain, tense to catch
some sign of the Trojans launching an attack.
The old chariot-driver warmed to the sight
and cheered them on with urgings flying fast:
"Keep it up, my boys, that's the way to watch!
Not one of you submit to the grip of sleep—
you'd give great joy to the men who'd take our lives."

 

  With that the driver clambered through the trench.
They took the old captain's lead, the Argive kings
all called to the muster now. And flanking them
Meriones came in haste with Nestor's handsome son—
the kings had summoned both to share their counsel.
Crossing out over the deep trench they grouped
on open ground, where they chanced to find a sector
free and clear of corpses, in fact the very place
where Hector in all his power had veered and turned away
from cutting Argives down when night closed in.
There they settled, conferring among themselves
till the noble horseman opened with his plan:
"My friends, isn't there one man among us here,
so sure of himself, his soldier's nerve and pluck,
he'd infiltrate these overreaching Trojans?
Perhaps he'd seize a straggler among the foe
or catch some rumor floating along their lines.
What plans are they mapping, what maneuvers next?
Are they bent on holding tight by the ships, exposed?—
or heading home to Troy, now they've trounced our armies?
If a man could gather that, then make it back unharmed,
why, what glory he'd gain across the whole wide earth
in the eyes of every man—and what a gift he'd win!
All the lords who command the ships of battle,
each and every one will give him a black ewe
suckling a young lamb-no prize of honor like it.
They'll ask that man to every feast and revel."

 

  So Nestor proposed. All ranks held their peace
but Diomedes lord of the war cry spoke up briskly:
"Nestor, the mission stirs my fighting blood.
I'll slip right into enemy lines at once—
these Trojans, camped at our flank.
If another comrade would escort me, though,
there'd be more comfort in it, confidence too.
When two work side-by-side, one or the other
spots the opening first if a kill's at hand.
When one looks out for himself, alert but alone,
his reach is shorter—his sly moves miss the mark."

 

  At that a crowd volunteered to go with Diomedes.
The two Aeantes, old campaigners, volunteered,
Meriones volunteered and Nestor's son leapt up
and Menelaus the famous spearman volunteered
and battle-hardened Odysseus too, to foray
into the Trojan units camped for the night—
Odysseus' blood was always up for exploit.
But King Agamemnon interceded quickly,
"Diomedes, soldier after my own heart,
pick your comrade now, whomever you want,
the best of the volunteers-how many long to go!
But no false respect. Don't pass over the better man
and pick the worse. Don't bow to a soldier's rank,
an eye to his birth—even if he's more kingly."

 

  He suddenly feared for red-haired Menelaus
but Diomedes strong with the war cry answered,
"Is that an order? Pick my own comrade?
Then how could I 7,-.,s up royal- Odysseus here?
His heart's so game, his fighting edge so keen,
the best of us all in every combat mission—
Athena loves the man. With him at my side
we'd go through fire and make it back alive—
no one excels the mastermind of battle."

 

  But much-enduring Odysseus cut him short:
"Not too long on the praise-don't fault me either.
You're talking to Argive men who know my record.
Let's move out. The night is well on its way
and daybreak's near. The stars go wheeling by,
the full of the dark is gone—two watches down
but the third's still ours for action."
On that note
both men harnessed up in the grim gear of war . . .
Thrasymedes staunch in combat handed Tydeus' son
a two-edged sword—he'd left his own at the ship—
a shield too, and over his head he set a helmet,
bull's-hide, bare of ridge and crest, a skullcap,
so it's called, and made to protect the heads
of tough young-blooded fighters.
Meriones gave Odysseus bow, quiver and sword
and over his head he set a helmet made of leather.
Inside it was crisscrossed taut with many thongs,
outside the gleaming teeth of a white-tusked boar
ran round and round in rows stitched neat and tight—
a master craftsman's work, the cap in its center
padded soft with felt. The Wolf Himself Autolycus
lifted that splendid headgear out of Eleon once,
he stole it from Ormenus' son Amyntor years ago,
breaching his sturdy palace walls one night
then passed it on to Amphidamas, Cythera-born,
Scandia-bound. Amphidamas gave it to Molus,
a guest-gift once that Molus gave Meriones
his son to wear in battle. And now it encased
Odysseus' head, snug around his brows.
And so,
both harnessed up in the grim gear of war,
the two men moved out, leaving behind them
all the captains clustered on the spot. .
Athena winged a heron close to their path
and veering right. Neither man could see it,
scanning the dark night, they only heard its cry.
Glad for the lucky sign, Odysseus prayed to Pallas,
"Hear me, daughter of Zeus whose shield is thunder!
Standing by me always, in every combat mission—
no maneuver of mine slips by you—now, again,
give me your best support, Athena, comrade!
Grant our return in glory back to the warships
once we've done some feat that brings the Trojans pain!"

 

  Next Diomedes lord of the war cry prayed aloud,
"Hear me too, daughter of Zeus, tireless goddess!
Be with me now, just as you went with father,
veteran Tydeus, into Thebes that day
he ran ahead of the Argives with his message.
He left his armored men along the Asopus banks
and carried a peaceful word to Theban cohorts
crowded in their halls. But turning back he bent
to some grand and grisly work with you, Goddess,
and you stood by him then, a steadfast ally.
So come, stand by me now, protect me now!
I will make you a sacrifice, a yearling heifer
broad in the brow, unbroken, never yoked by men.
I'll offer it up to you—I'll sheathe its horns in gold!"

 

  Their prayers rose and Pallas Athena heard them.
Once they'd appealed to Zeus's mighty daughter,
into the black night they went like two lions
stalking through the carnage and the corpses,
through piles of armor and black pools of blood.

 

  But no sleep for the headstrong Trojans either.
Hector would not permit it. He summoned all his chiefs
to a council of war, all Trojan lords and captains.
Mustering them he launched his own crafty plan:
"Who will undertake a mission and bring it off
for a princely gift? A prize to match the exploit!
I'll give him a chariot, two horses with strong necks,
the best of the breeds beside Achaea's fast ships.
Whoever will dare—what glory he can win—
a night patrol by the ships to learn at once
if the fleet's still guarded as before or now,
battered down at our hands, huddling together,
they plan a quick escape, their morale too low
to mount the watch tonight—bone-weary from battle."

 

  So Hector proposed. All ranks held their peace.
But there was a man among the troops, one Dolon,
a son of the sacred Trojan herald Eumedes.
He was rich in bronze, rich in bars of gold,
no feast for the eyes but lightning on his feet
and an only son in the midst of five sisters.
This one volunteered among the Trojans:
"Hector, the mission stirs my fighting blood—
I'll reconnoiter the ships and gather all I can.
Come, raise that scepter and swear you'll give me
the battle-team and the burnished brazen car
that carry great Achilles—I will be your spy.
And no mean scout, I'll never let you down.
I'll infiltrate their entire army, I will,
all the way till I reach the ship of Agamemnon!
That's where the captains must be mapping tactics now,
whether they'll break and run or stand and fight."

 

  How he bragged and Hector, grasping his scepter,
swore a binding oath: "Now Zeus my witness,
thundering lord of Hera-no other Trojan fighter
will ride behind that team, none but you, I swear—
they will be your glory all your life to come!"

 

  So Hector vowed—with an oath he swore in vain
but it spurred the man to action. Dolon leapt to it,
he quickly slung a reflex bow on his back,
over it threw the pelt of a gray wolf
and set on his head a cap of weasel skin
and taking a sharp spear, moved out from camp,
heading toward the fleet—but he was never to come back
from the enemy's beaked ships, bringing Hector news.
Putting the mass of horse and men behind him
Dolon picked up speed, hot for action now,
but keen as a god Odysseus saw him coming
and alerted Diomedes: "Who is this?
A man heading out of the Trojan camp!
Why? I can't be sure—to spy on our ships
or loot the fallen, one of the fighters' corpses?
Let him get past us first, into the clear a bit,
then rush him and overtake him double-quick!
If he outruns us, crowd him against the ships,
cut him off from his lines, harry him with your spear
and never stop—so he can't bolt back to Troy."

 

  No more words. Swerving off the trail
they both lay facedown with the corpses now
as Dolon sped by at a dead run, the fool.
Soon as he got a furlong's lead ahead,
the plowing-range of a good team of mules—
faster than draft oxen dragging a bolted plow
through deep fallow ground—the two raced after
and Dolon, hearing their tread, froze stock-still,
his heart leaping—here were friends, yes,
fellow Trojans coming to turn him back,
yes, Hector had just called off the mission!
But soon as they were a spear-cast off or less
he saw them—enemies—
quick as a flash he sprang,
fleeing for dear life—
they sprang in pursuit
as a pair of rip-tooth hounds
bred for the hunt and flushing fawn or hare
through a woody glen keep closing for the kill,
nonstop and the prey goes screaming on ahead—
so Odysseus raider of cities and Diomedes
cut him off from his own lines, coursing him,
closing nonstop with the Trojan about to break in
on the line of sentries, racing fast for the ships--
when Athena poured fresh strength in Tydeus' son
so no Achaean could beat him out for the glory
of hitting Dolon first, Diomedes come in second.
Rushing him with his spear in a sudden surge
Tydides shouted, "Stop or I'll run you through!
You'll never escape my spear—headlong death—
I swear I'll send it hurling from my fist!"

 

  He flung his shaft, missing the man on purpose--
over his right shoulder the sharp spearpoint winged
and stabbed the earth. Dead in his tracks he stopped,
terrified, stammering, teeth chattering in his mouth,
bled white with fear as the two men overtook him
and panting hard, yanked and pinned his arms.
He burst into tears, pleading, "Take me alive!
I'll ransom myself! Treasures cram our house,
bronze and gold and plenty of well-wrought iron--
father would give you anything, gladly, priceless ransom—
if only he learns I'm still alive in Argive ships!"

 

  Odysseus quick with tactics answered, "Courage.
Death is your last worry. Put your mind at rest.
Come, tell me the truth now, point by point.
Why prowling among the ships, cut off from camp,
alone in the dead of night when other men are sleeping?
To loot the fallen, one of the fighters' corpses?
Or did Hector send you out to spy on our ships,
reconnoiter them stem to stem?
Or did your own itch for glory spur you on?"

 

  Dolon answered, his legs shaking under him,
"Hector—he duped me so—so many mad, blind hopes!
He swore he'd give me the great Achilles' stallions,
purebred racers, his burnished bronze chariot tool
He told me to go through the rushing dark night,
to patrol the enemy lines and learn at once
if the fleet's still guarded as before or now,
battered down at our hands, huddling together,
you plan a quick escape, your morale too low
to mount the watch tonight—bone-weary from battle."

 

  Breaking into a smile the cool tactician laughed,
"By god, what heroic gifts you set your heart on—
the great Achilles' team!
They're hard for mortal men to curb or drive,
for all but Achilles—his mother is immortal.
Now out with it, point by point. Hector—
where did you leave the captain when you came?
Where's his war-gear lying? where's his chariot?
How are the other Trojans posted—guards, sleepers?
What plans are they mapping, what maneuvers next?
Are they bent on holding tight by the ships, exposed?—
or heading home to Troy, now they've trounced our armies?"

 

  And Dolon son of the herald blurted out, "Yes, yes,
I'll tell you everything, down to the last detail!
Hector's holding council with all his chiefs,
mapping plans on old King Ilus' barrow,
clear of the crowds at camp. Guards, my lord?
Nothing. No one's picked to defend the army.
Only our native Trojans hold their posts—
many as those with hearth fires back in Troy—
our men have no choice, shouting out to each other,
'Stay awake! keep watch!' But our far-flung friends,
they're fast asleep, they leave the watch to us—
their wives and children are hardly camped nearby."

 

  But the shrewd tactician kept on pressing: "Be precise.
Where are they sleeping? Mixed in with the Trojans?
Separate quarters? Tell me. I must know it all."

 

  And Dolon son of the herald kept on blurting,
"Everything—anything—whatever will satisfy you!
To seaward, Carians, Paeonian men with bent bows,
Leleges and Cauconians, crack Pelasgians—inland,
toward Thymbra, camp the Lycians, swaggering Mysians,
fighting Phrygian horsemen, Maeonian chariot-drivers—
but why interrogate me down to the last platoon?
You really want to raid some enemy units?
There are the Thracians, look, just arrived,
exposed on the flank, apart from all the rest
and right in their midst Eioneus' son, King Rhesus.
His are the best horses I ever saw, the biggest,
whiter than snow, and speed to match the wind!
His chariot's finished off with gold and silver,
the armor he's brought in with him, gold too,
tremendous equipment—what a marvelous sight.
No gear for a mortal man to wear, I'd say,
it's fit for the deathless gods!
There. Now will you take me to your ships
or leave me here—bound and gagged right here?—
till you can make your raid and test my story,
see if I've told the truth or I've been lying."

 

  But rugged Diomedes gave him a grim look:
"Escape? Take my advice and wipe it from your mind,
good as your message is—you're in my hands now.
What if we set you free or you should slip away?
Back you'll slink to our fast ships tomorrow,
playing the spy again or fighting face-to-face.
But if I snuff your life out in my hands,
you'll never annoy our Argive lines again."

 

  With that, just as Dolon reached up for his chin
to cling with a frantic hand and beg for life,
Diomedes struck him square across the neck—
a flashing hack of the sword—both tendons snapped
and the shrieking head went tumbling in the dust.
They tore the weasel-cap from the head, stripped
the wolf pelt, the reflex bow and long tough spear
and swinging the trophies high to Pallas queen of plunder,
exultant royal Odysseus shouted out this prayer:
"Here, Goddess, rejoice in these, they're yours!
You are the first of all the gods we'll call!
Now guide us again, Athena, guide us against
that Thracian camp and horses!"
  So Odysseus prayed
and hoisting the spoils over his head, heaved them
onto a tamarisk bush nearby and against it heaped
a good clear landmark, clumping together reeds
and fresh tamarisk boughs they'd never miss
as they ran back through the rushing dark night.
On they stalked through armor and black pools of blood
and suddenly reached their goal, the Thracian outpost.
The troops were sleeping, weary from pitching camp,
their weapons piled beside them on the ground,
three neat rows of the burnished well-kept arms
and beside each man his pair of battle-horses.
Right in the midst lay Rhesus dead asleep,
his white racers beside him, strapped by thongs
to his chariot's outer rail. Spotting him first
Odysseus quickly pointed him out to Diomedes:
"Look, here's our man, here are his horses.
The ones marked out by the rascal we just killed.
On with it now—show us your strength, full force.
Don't just stand there, useless with your weapons.
Loose those horses—or you go kill the men
and leave the team to me!"
  Athena, eyes blazing,
breathed fury in Diomedes and he went whirling
into the slaughter now, hacking left and right
and hideous groans broke from the dying Thracians
slashed by the sword-the ground ran red with blood.
As a lion springs on flocks unguarded, shepherd gone,
pouncing on goats or sheep and claw-mad for the kill,
so Tydeus' son went tearing into that Thracian camp
until he'd butchered twelve. Each man he'd stand above
and chop with the sword, the cool tactician Odysseus
grappled from behind, grabbing the fighter's heels,
dragging him out of the way with one thought in mind:
that team with their flowing manes must get through fast,
not quake at heart and balk, trampling over the dead,
those purebred horses still not used to corpses.
But now the son of Tydeus came upon the king,
the thirteenth man, and ripped away his life,
his sweet life as he lay there breathing hard.
A nightmare hovered above his head that night—
Diomedes himself! sped by Athena's battle-plan—
while staunch Odysseus loosed the stamping horses,
hitched them together tight with their own reins
and drove them through the nick,
lashing them with his bow: he forgot to snatch
the shining whip that lay in the well-wrought car.
He whistled shrill, his signal to rugged Diomedes
pausing, deep in thought . . . what was the worst,
most brazen thing he could do? Seize the car
where the handsome armor lay and pull it out
by the pole or prize it up, bodily, haul it off—
or tear the life from still more Thracian troops?
His mind swarming with all this, Pallas Athena
swept to his side and cautioned Diomedes, "Back—
think only of getting back, great son of Tydeus!
Back to the ships, quick, or you'll run for your life!
Some other god—who knows?—may wake the Trojans."

 

  The goddess' voice—he knew it, mounted at once
as Odysseus whacked the stallions smartly with his bow
and they made a run for Achaea's rapid ships.

 

  But Apollo lord of the silver bow kept watch.
No blind man's watch, no, Apollo saw Athena
take Tydides in hand, and raging against her
plunged into the main mass of Trojan fighters
to rouse a Thracian captain called Hippocoon,
a loyal kinsman of Rhesus. He woke with a jolt
and seeing empty ground where the fast team had stood,
men gasping out their lives, retching in all that carnage,
he wailed out, sobbing, crying his dear companion's name
and piercing wails broke as the Trojans swirled in panic—
a desperate rout of them rushing up to the bloodbath ,there
stood staring down at the grisly work the marauders did
before they made their dash for the beaked ships.

 

Reaching the place where they'd killed Hector's spy,
Odysseus dear to Zeus reined in the headlong team
and leaping down to the ground Tydides heaved
the bloody spoils into his comrade's arms.
He mounted again and flogged the horses hard
and on they flew to the ships, holding nothing back—
that's where their spirits drove them on to go.
Nestor, the first to hear their thunder, shouted,
"Friends—lords of the Argives, all our captains,
right or wrong, what can I say? My heart tells me,
my ears ring with the din of drumming hoofs .. .
If only Odysseus and rugged Diomedes were driving
racers off the Trojan lines, here, here and fast!
I'm cold with fear—what if they've met the worst,
our ranking Argives killed in a Trojan charge?"

 

  Before he could say the last, the two raced in,
leapt to the ground and comrades hugged them warmly,
with handclasps all around and words of welcome.
Nestor the noble horseman led with questions:
"Tell me, Odysseus, Achaea's pride and glory,
famous Odysseus, how did you get these horses?
How—stealing behind the Trojans' main lines
or meeting up with a god who gave them to you?
What terrific sheen-silver afire like sunbeams!
Day after day I've gone against the Trojans,
never hanging back by the ships, I swear,
old warrior that I am—
But I've never seen such horses, never dreamed . . .
I'd say an immortal came your way and gave you these.
Zeus who marshals the storm cloud loves you both,
Zeus's daughter too with the shield of thunder.
Athena's eyes are shining on you both!"

 

  The cool tactician set the record straight:
"No, no, Nestor—Achaea's greatest glory—
any god, if he really set his mind to it,
could give us an even finer pair than this.
Easily. The gods are so much stronger.
Now these horses you ask about, old soldier,
they're newcomers, just arrived from Thrace.
Their master? Brave Diomedes killed him off,
twelve of his cohorts too, all men of rank.
And a thirteenth man besides, a scout we took—
prowling along the ships, spying on our positions—
Hector and all his princely Trojans sent him out."

 

  And across the trench he drove the purebred team
with a rough exultant laugh as comrades cheered,
crowding in his wake.
And once they reached Tydides' sturdy lodge
they tethered the horses there with well-cut reins,
hitching them by the trough where Diomedes' stallions
pawed the ground, champing their sweet barley.
Then away in his ship's stem Odysseus stowed
the bloody gear of Dolon, in pledge of the gift
they'd sworn to give Athena. The men themselves,
wading into the sea, washed off the crusted sweat
from shins and necks and thighs. And once the surf
had scoured the thick caked sweat from their limbs
and the two fighters cooled, their hearts revived
and into the polished tubs they climbed and bathed.
And rinsing off, their skin sleek with an olive oil rub,
they sat down to their meal and dipping up their cups
from an overflowing bowl, they poured them forth—
honeyed, mellow wine to the great goddess Athena.

Now Dawn rose up from bed by her lordly mate Tithonus,
bringing light to immortal gods and mortal men.
But Zeus flung Strife on Achaea's fast ships,
the brutal goddess flaring his storm-shield,
his monstrous sign of war in both her fists.
She stood on Odysseus' huge black-bellied hull,
moored mid-line so a shout could reach both wings,
upshore to Telamonian Ajax' camp or down to Achilles'—
trusting so to their arms' power and battle-strength
they'd hauled their trim ships up on either flank.
There Strife took her stand, raising her high-pitched cry,
great and terrible, lashing the fighting-fury
in each Achaean's heart—no stopping them now,
mad for war and struggle. Now, suddenly,
battle thrilled them more than the journey home,
than sailing hollow ships to their dear native land.

 

  Agamemnon cried out too, calling men to arms
and harnessed up in gleaming bronze himself.
First he wrapped his legs with well-made greaves,
fastened behind the heels with silver ankle-clasps,
and next he strapped the breastplate round his chest
that Cinyras gave him once, a guest-gift long ago.
The rousing rumor of war had carried far as Cyprus—
how the Achaean ships were launching war on Troy—
so he gave the king that gear to please his spirit.
Magnificent! Ten bands of blue enamel spanned it,
spaced by twelve of gold and twenty of beaten tin
and dark blue serpents writhed toward the throat,
three each side, shimmering bright as rainbows arched
on the clouds by Cronus' son, a sign to mortal men.
Then over his shoulder Agamemnon slung his sword,
golden studs at the hilt, the blade burnished bright
and the scabbard sheathed in silver swung on golden straps,
and he grasped a well-wrought shield to encase his body,
forged for rushing forays—beautiful, blazoned work.
Circling the center, ten strong rings of bronze
with twenty disks of glittering tin set in,
at the heart a boss of bulging blue steel
and there like a crown the Gorgon's grim mask—
the burning eyes, the stark, transfixing horror—
and round her strode the shapes of Rout and Fear.
The shield-belt glinted silver and rippling on it ran
a dark blue serpent, two heads coiling round a third,
reared from a single neck and twisting left and right.
Then over his broad brow Agamemnon set his helmet
fronted with four knobs and forked with twin horns
and the horsehair crest atop it tossing, bristling terror.
And last he picked up two tough spears, tipped in bronze,
honed sharp, and the glare flashed off their brazen points
and pierced the high skies—and awestruck at the sight
Athena and Hera loosed a crack of thunder, exalting
the great king of Mycenae rich in gold.
At once
each captain shouted out commands to his driver:
"Rein the team by the trench, good battle-order now!"
While the men themselves, armed for full assault,
leapt down and swarmed to the trench's edge on foot
and a long undying roar went up in the early dawn.
Well ahead of the war-cars they reached the brink,
closed ranks as drivers backed them yards behind.
But Zeus drove a swirl of panic deep in their lines
and down from the vaulting skies released a shower
raining blood, for Zeus was bent on hurling down
to the House of Death a rout of sturdy fighters.

 

  Trojans—the other side on the plain's high ground—
formed around tall Hector, staunch Polydamas, Aeneas
loved by the Trojans like a god, and Antenor's sons,
Polybus, Prince Agenor and Acamas still unwed,
three men in their prime like gods who never die.
Hector bore his round shield in the forefront, blazing out
like the Dog Star through the clouds, all withering fire,
then plunging back in the cloud-rack massed and dark—
so Hector ranged on, now flaring along the front,
now shouting his orders back toward the rear,
all of him armed in bronze aflash like lightning
flung by Father Zeus with his battle-shield of thunder.

 

  And the men like gangs of reapers slashing down
the reaping-rows and coming closer, closer across
the field of a warlord rich in wheat or barley—
swaths by the armfuls falling thick-and-fast—
so Achaeans and Trojans closed and slashed,
lunging into each other and neither side now
had a thought of flight that would have meant disaster.
No, the pressure of combat locked them head-to-head,
lunging like wolves, and Strife with wild groans
exulted to see them, glaring down at the melee,
Strife alone of immortals hovering over fighters.
The other gods kept clear, at their royal ease,
reclining off in the halls where the roofs of each
were built for the ages high on rugged ridged Olympus.
And all were blaming Zeus with his storming dark clouds
because the Father decreed to hand the Trojans glory.
But the Father paid no heed to them. Retiring
peaks apart from the other gods, he sat aloof,
glorying in his power, gazing out over .
the city walls of Troy and the warships of Achaea,
the flash of bronze, fighters killing, fighters killed . . .

 

  As long as morning rose and the blessed day grew stronger,
the weapons hurtled side-to-side and men kept falling.
But just when the woodsman makes his morning meal,
deep in a mountain forest, arm-weary from chopping
the big heavy trunks and his heart has had enough
and sudden longing for tempting food overtakes the man
and makes his senses whirl just at the height of morning
the Argives smashed battalions, their courage breaking through
and they shouted ranks of cohorts on along the lines.
And right in the midst sprang Agamemnon first
and killed a fighter, Bienor, veteran captain,
then his aide Oileus lashing on their team.
Down from the car he'd leapt, squaring off,
charging in full fury, full face, straight
into Agamemnon's spearhead ramming sharp—
the rim of the bronze helmet could not hold it,
clean through heavy metal and bone the point burst
and the brains splattered all inside the casque.
He battered Oileus down despite the Trojan's rage
and the lord of fighters left them lying there, both dead
and their chests gleamed like bronze as he stripped them bare.
Then on he went for Isus and Antiphus, killed and stripped
the two sons of Priam, one a bastard, one royal blood
and both riding a single car, the bastard driving,
the famous Antiphus standing poised beside him . . .
Achilles had caught them once on the spurs of Ida,
bound them with willow ropes as they watched their flocks
and set them free for ransom. But now it was Agamemnon
lord of the far-flung kingdoms catching up with Isus—
he stabbed his chest with a spear above the nipple,
Antiphus he hacked with a sword across the ear
and hurled him from his chariot, rushing fast
to rip the splendid armor off their bodies.
He knew them both, he'd seen them once by the ships
when the swift Achilles dragged them in from Ida.
Think how a lion, mauling the soft weak young
of a running deer, clamped in his massive jaws,
cracks their backbones with a snap—he's stormed in,
invading the lair to tear their tender hearts out
and the mother doe, even if she's close by,
what can she do to save her fawns? She's helpless—
terrible trembling racks her body too—and suddenly
off she bounds through the glades and the thick woods,
drenched in sweat, leaping clear of the big cat's pounce.,
So not a single Trojan could save those two from death,
they fled themselves before the Argive charge.
But next
Agamemnon killed Pisander and combat-hard Hippolochus,
two sons of Antimachus, that cunning, politic man
whom Paris bribed with gold and sumptuous gifts,
so he was the first to fight the return of Helen
to red-haired Menelaus. Now powerful Agamemnon
caught his two sons riding the same chariot,
both struggling to curb their high-strung team—
the reins slipped their grasp, both horses panicked
as Agamemnon ramped up in their faces like a lion—
both fighters shouting from their chariot, pleading,
"Take us alive, Atrides, take a ransom worth our lives!
Vast treasures are piled up in Antimachus' house,
bronze and gold and plenty of well-wrought iron—
father would give you anything, gladly, priceless ransom
if only he learns we're still alive in Argive ships!"

 

  So they cried to the king, cries for mercy,
but only heard a merciless voice in answer:
"Cunning Antimachus! So you're that man's sons?
Once in the Trojan council he ordered Menelaus,
there on an embassy joined by King Odysseus,
murdered right on the spot—no safe-conduct
back to the land of Argos. You're his sons?
Now pay for your father's outrage, blood for blood!"

 

  And he pitched Pisander off the chariot onto earth
and plunged a spear in his chest—the man crashed on his back
as Hippolochus leapt away, but him he killed on the ground,
slashing off his arms with a sword, lopping off his head
and he sent him rolling through the carnage like a log.
He left them there for dead and just at the point
where most battalions scattered Agamemnon charged,
the rest of his troops in armor quick behind him now,
infantry killing infantry fleeing headlong, hard-pressed,
drivers killing drivers—under the onrush dust in whirlwinds
driven up from the plain, hoofs of stallions rumbling thunder,
bronze flashing, immense slaughter and always King Agamemnon
whirling to kill, crying his Argives on, breakneck on.
Like devouring fire roaring down onto dry dead timber,
squalls hurling it on, careening left and right and
brush ripped up by the roots goes tumbling under
crushed by the blasting fire rampaging on—
so under Atrides' onslaught Trojans dropped in flight,
stampedes of massive stallions dragged their empty chariots
clattering down the passageways of battle, stallions
yearning to feel their masters' hands at the reins
but there they lay, sprawled across the field,
craved far more by the vultures than by wives.

 


  But Zeus drew Hector out of range of the weapons,
out of the dust storm, out of the mounting kills,
the blood and rout of war as Atrides followed hard,
shouting his Argives on, furious, never stopping.
The Trojans streaked in flight past Ilus' barrow,
ancient son of Dardanus, past the mid-field mark
of the plain and past the wild fig and struggling
to reach Troy and always in hot pursuit and shrieking,
Agamemnon splattered with gore, his hands, invincible hands.
But once they reached the Scaean Gates and the great oak,
there the two sides halted, waiting each other's charge.
Yet stragglers still stampeded down the plain
like cattle driven wild by a lion lunging
in pitch darkness down on the whole herd
but to one alone a sudden death comes flashing—
first he snaps its neck, clamped in his huge jaws,
then down in gulps he bolts its blood and guts.
So King Agamemnon coursed his quarry, always cutting
the straggler from the mass and they, they fled in terror,
squads amok, spilling out of their chariots facefirst
or slammed on their backs beneath Atrides' hands—
storming and thrusting his spear and lunging on.
But just as he was about to reach the steep city,
up under the walls, the father of men and gods,
descending out of the heavens, took his throne
on the high ridge of Ida with all her springs.
Holding fast in his grip a lightning bolt
he drove Iris down in a rush of golden wings
to bear his message: "Away with you now, Iris—
quick as the wind and speed this word to Hector.
So long as he sees lord marshal Agamemnon storming
among the champions, mowing columns down in blood,
Hector must hold back, command the rest of his men
to fight the enemy, stand their headlong charge.
But soon as a spear or bowshot wounds the king
and Atrides mounts his chariot once again,
then I will hand Hector the power to kill and kill
till he cuts his way to the benched ships and the sun sinks
and the blessed darkness sweeps across the earth."

 

  So he commanded. Wind-quick Iris obeyed at once
and down from Ida's peaks she dove to sacred Troy,
found the son of wise King Priam, shining Hector
standing amidst his teams and bolted cars,
and swift as a breeze beside him Iris called,
"Hector, son of Priam—a mastermind like Zeus!
The Father has sped me down to tell you this:
so long as you see lord marshal Agamemnon storming
among the champions, mowing columns down in blood,
you must hold back, command the rest of your men
to fight the enemy, stand their headlong charge!
But soon as a spear or bowshot wounds the king
and Atrides mounts his chariot once again—
then Zeus will hand you the power to kill and kill
till you cut your way to the benched ships and the sun sinks
and the blessed darkness sweeps across the earth!"

 

  And Iris racing the wind went veering off.
Hector leapt to ground from his chariot fully armed
and brandishing two sharp spears went striding down his lines,
ranging flank to flank, driving his fighters into battle,
rousing grisly war—and round the Trojans whirled,
bracing to meet the Argives face-to-face:
but against their mass the Argives closed ranks,
the fighting about to break, the troops squaring off
and Atrides, tense to outfight them all, charged first.

 

  Sing to me now, you Muses who hold the halls of Olympus,
who was the first to go up against King Agamemnon,
who of the Trojans or famous Trojan allies?

 

  Iphidamas, the rough and rangy son of Anterior
bred in the fertile land of Thrace, mother of flocks.
Cisseus reared him at home when he was little—
his mother's father who sired the fine beauty Theano—
but once he hit the stride of his youth and ached for fame,
Cisseus tried to hold him back, gave him a daughter's hand
but warm from the bridal chamber marched the groom,
fired up by word that Achaea's troops had landed.
Twelve beaked ships sailed out in his command,
trim vessels he left behind him in Percote,
making his way to Troy to fight on foot
and here he came now, up against Agamemnon,
closer, closing . . .
  Atrides hurled and missed,
his spearshaft just slanting aside the man's flank
as Iphidamas went for the waist beneath the breastplate—
he stabbed home, leaning into the blow full weight,
trusting his heavy hand but failed to pierce
the glittering belt, failed flat-out—the point,
smashing against the silver, bent back like lead.
And seizing the spearshaft powerful Agamemnon
dragged it toward him, tussling like some lion
and wrenching it free from Iphidamas' slack grasp
he hacked his neck with a sword and loosed his limbs.
And there he dropped and slept the sleep of bronze,
poor soldier, striving to help his fellow Trojans,
far from his wedded wife, his new bride . . .
No joy had he known from her for all his gifts,
the full hundred oxen he gave her on the spot
then promised a thousand head of goats and sheep
from the boundless herds he'd rounded up himself.
Now the son of Atreus stripped him, robbed his corpse
and strode back to his waiting Argive armies,
hoisting the gleaming gear.
But Coon marked him, Coon,
Antenor's eldest son, a distinguished man-at-arms,
and stinging grief went misting down his eyes
for his fallen brother. In from the blind side
he came—
Agamemnon never saw him
  tensed with a spear
and slashed him under the elbow, down the forearm—
a glint of metal—the point ripped through his flesh
and the lord of fighting men Atrides shuddered.
Not that he quit the foray even then—
he sprang at Coon, gripping his big spearshaft
tough from the gusting wind that whipped its tree.
Coon was just dragging his brother footfirst,
wild now to retrieve his own father's son,
calling for help from all the bravest men—
but as Coon hauled the body through the press
Agamemnon lunged up, under his bossed shield,
thrust home hard with the polished bronze point,
unstrung his limbs and reared and lopped his head
and the head tumbled onto his fallen brother's corpse.
So then and there under royal Agamemnon's hands
the two sons of Antenor filled out their fates
and down they plunged to the strong House of Death.

 

  But the king kept ranging, battling ranks on ranks
and thrusting his spear and sword and hurling heavy rocks
so long as the blood came flowing warm from his wound.
But soon as the gash dried and firm clots formed,
sharp pain came bursting in on Atrides' strength—
spear-sharp as the labor-pangs that pierce a woman,
agonies brought on by the harsh, birthing spirits,
Hera's daughters who hold the stabbing power of birth—
so sharp the throes that burst on Atrides' strength.
And back he sprang in the car and told his driver
to make for the hollow ships, racked with pain
but he loosed a shrill cry to all his men:
"Friends—lords of the Argives, 0 my captains!
Your turn now-keep on shielding our fast ships
from this latest mass attack. Zeus who rules the world
forbids me to battle Trojans all day long."
  A crack of the lash
and his driver whipped the team with streaming manes


straight for the curved ships, and on they flew,
holding nothing back, their heaving chests foaming,
bellies pelted with dust, rushing the wounded warlord
free and clear of battle.
  There—Hector's signal!
Seeing Atrides hurt and speeding off the lines
he gave a ringing shout to his troops and allies:
"Trojans! Lycians! Dardan fighters hand-to-hand—
now be men, my friends, call up your battle-fury!
Their best man cuts and runs—
Zeus is handing me glory, awesome glory.
Drive your horses right at these mighty Argives,
seize the higher triumph—seize it now!"
Hector—
whipping the fight and fire in each man like a huntsman
crying on his hounds, their white fangs flashing,
harrying savage game, some wild boar or lion—
so at Achaea's ranks he drove his fearless Trojans,
Hector son of Priam, a match for murderous Ares.
The prince himself went wading into the front lines,
his hopes soaring, and down he hurled on the fray
like a sudden killer-squall that blasts down
on the dark blue sea to whip and chop its crests.

 

  Who was the first he slaughtered, who the last,
Hector the son of Priam, now Zeus gave him glory?
Asaeus first, Autonous next and then Opites,
Dolops, Clytius' son, and Opheltius, Agelaus,
Aesymnus and Orus, Hipponous staunch in combat.
These were the Argive captains Hector killed
then went for the main mass
like the West Wind battering soft shining clouds
the South Wind wafts along—in deep explosive blasts
it strikes and the great swelling waves roll on and on
and the spray goes shooting up from under the wind's hurl
swerving, roaring down the sea—so wildly Hector routed
the packed lines of fighters caught in his onslaught.

 

  Now there would have been havoc, irreversible chaos,
fleeing bands of Achaeans flung back on their ships
if Odysseus had not shouted out to Diomedes,
"What's wrong with us? Forgetting our battle-fury?
Come here, old friend, stand by me! What humiliation—
if Hector with that flashing helmet takes our ships!"

 

  Powerful Diomedes took his challenge quickly:
"I'll stand and fight, by god, and take the worst
but little joy it will bring our comrades now.
Zeus the king of the clouds has pitched on victory
for the Trojans, not for us."
But all the same
he hurled Thymbraeus down to ground from his car—
Diomedes speared his left breast as Odysseus killed
the warlord's aide-in-arms Molion tall as a god
and left them there for dead, their fighting finished.
Then both went thrashing into the lines to make a slaughter
as two wild boars bristling, ramping back for the kill,
fling themselves on the yelping packs that hunt them—
back they whirled on attack and laid the Trojans low
while Achaeans just in flight from Hector's onset
leapt at the chance to gather second wind.
At once
they took two lords of the realm and seizieed their car,
the two good sons of Merops out of Percote harbor,
Merops adept beyond all men in the mantic arts.
He refused to let his two boys march to war,
this man-killing war, but the young ones fought him
all the way—the forces of black death drove them on
and Diomedes a marvel with a spear destroyed them both,
stripped them of life breath and tore their gear away
and Odysseus killed Hippodamus, killed Hypirochus.
And there,
gazing down from his ridge on Ida, the son of Cronus
stretched the rope of battle tense and taut
as the fighters kept on killing side-to-side.
Diomedes hurled a spear that struck Agastrophus,
Paeon's warrior son, and smashed the joint of his hip
but his team was not close by for fast escape—
a big mistake, the fool.
His driver held them reined off at the side
while he advanced through the front ranks on foot,
plowing on and on till he lost his own life . . .
But Hector quickly marked them across the lines—
he charged them both full force with a savage shout
and Trojan battalions churning in his wake.
Diomedes shuddered to see him coming on,
the lord of the war cry called out to Odysseus
quickly, close beside him, "We're in for shipwreck—
a breaker rolling down on us, look, this massive Hector!
Brace for him, stand our ground together—beat him back!"

 

  He aimed and hurled and his spear's long shadow flew—
a clean hit, no miss, trained at the head of Hector,
his helmet ridge. But bronze glanced off bronze
and never grazed firm flesh, the helmet blocked it,
triple-ply with the great blank hollow eyes,
a gift of Apollo. Sprinting a long way back,
downfield and fast, Hector rejoined his men
and sinking down onto one knee, propped himself
with a strong hand planted against the earth—
and the world went black as night across his eyes.
But soon as Tydides followed up his spear,
tracking its flight far down along the front
where it stuck in sand, Hector caught his breath
and boarding his car, drove for his own main force
as he. hurtled clear of the dark fates of death—
Diomedes shouting after him, shaking his spear,
"Now, again, you've escaped your death, you dog,
but a good close brush with death it was, I'd say!
Now, again, your Phoebus Apollo pulls you through,
the one you pray to, wading into our storm of spears.
We'll fight again-I'll finish you off next time
if one of the gods will only urge me on as well.
But now I'll go for the others, anyone I can catch."

 

  And he set to stripping his kill, Paeon's spearman son.
But at once Paris the lord of fair-haired Helen
drew his bow at the rugged captain Diomedes . . .
the archer leaning firmly against a pillar
raised on the man-made tomb of Dardan's son,
Ilus an old lord of the realm in ancient days.
As Diomedes was stripping strong Agastrophus bare,
tearing tke burnished breastplate off his victim's chest,
the shield from his shoulders and heavy crested helmet,
Paris, clenching the grip and drawing back his bow,
shot!—no wasted shot, it whizzed from his hand
and punched the flat top of Tydides' right foot,
the shaft dug through and stuck fast in the ground.
And loosing a heady laugh of triumph Paris leapt
from his hiding-place and shouted out in glory,
"Now you're hit—no wasted shot, my winging arrow!
But would to god I'd hit you deep in the guts
and ripped your life away! Then my Trojans
could catch their breath again, reprieved from death--
they cringed at you like bleating goats before some lion."

 

  But never flinching, staunch Diomedes countered,
"So brave with your bow and arrows—big bravado—
glistening lovelocks, roving eye for girls!
Come, try me in combat, weapons hand-to-hand—
bow and spattering shafts will never help you then.
You scratch my foot and you're vaunting all the same—
but who cares? A woman or idiot boy could wound me so.
The shaft of a good-for-nothing coward's got no point
but mine's got heft and edge. Let it graze a man--
my weapon works in a flash and drops him dead.
And his good wife will tear her cheeks in grief,
his sons are orphans and he, soaking the soil
red with his own blood, he rots away himself—
more birds than women flocking round his body!"

 

  So he yelled and the famous spearman Odysseus
rushed in close and reared up to shield him.
Slipping behind, Tydides dropped to a knee
and yanked the winged arrow from his foot
as the raw pain went stabbing through his flesh.
Back Diomedes jumped on his car and told his driver
to make for the hollow ships—Tydides racked with pain.

 

  That left the famous spearman Odysseus on his own,
not a single Argive comrade standing by his side
since panic seized them all. Unnerved himself,
Odysseus probed his own great fighting heart:
"O dear god, what becomes of Odysseus now?
A disgraceful thing if I should break and run,
fearing their main force—but it's far worse
if I'm taken all alone. Look, Zeus just drove
the rest of my comrades off in panic flight.
But why debate, my friend, why thrash things out?
Cowards, I know, would quit the fighting now
but the man who wants to make his mark in war
must stand his ground and brace for all he's worth—
suffer his wounds or wound his man to death."

 

  Weighing it all, heart and soul, as on they came,
waves of Trojan shieldsmen crowding him tighter,
closing in on their own sure destruction . . .
like hounds and lusty hunters closing, ringing
a wild boar till out of his thicket lair he crashes,
whetting his white tusks sharp in his bent, wrenching jaws
and they rush in to attack and under the barks and shouts
you can hear the gnash of tusks but the men stand firm—
terrible, murderous as he is—so the Trojans ringed
Odysseus dear to Zeus, rushing him straight on.
But he lunged first, wounding lordly Deiopites,
spearshaft slicing into the Trojan's shoulder,
then cut down Thoon and Ennomus in their blood,
Chersidamas next, vaulting down from his car—
Odysseus caught him up under the bulging shield
with a jabbing spear that split him crotch to navel—
the man writhed in the dust, hands clutching the earth.
Odysseus left them dead and skewered Hippasus' son,
one Charops the blood brother of wealthy Socus
but Socus moved in quick as a god to shield his kin,
standing up to his enemy, crying out, "Odysseus—
wild for fame, glutton for cunning, glutton for war,
today you can triumph over the two sons of Hippasus,
killing such good men and stripping off their gear—
or beaten down by my spear you'll breathe your last!"

 

  With that he stabbed at Odysseus' balanced shield,
straight through the gleaming hide the heavy weapon drove,
ripping down and in through the breastplate finely worked
and it flayed the skin clean off Odysseus' ribs
but Pallas Athena would never let it pierce
her hero's vitals. Odysseus knew the end
had not yet come—no final, fatal wound—
and drawing back he hurled his boast at Socus:
"Poor man, headlong death is about to overtake you!
You've stopped my fighting against the Trojans, true,
but I tell you here and now that a dark, bloody doom
will take you down today—gouged by my spear
you'll give me glory now,
you'll give your life to the famous horseman Death!"

 

  And spinning in terror off he ran but as he spun
Odysseus plunged a spear in his back between the shoulders—
straight through his chest the shaft came jutting out
and down Socus crashed, Odysseus vaunting over him:
"Socus, son of Hippasus, skilled breaker of horses,
so, Death in its rampage outraced you-no escape.
No, poor soldier. Now your father and noble mother
will never close your eyes in death—screaming vultures
will claw them out of you, wings beating your corpse!
But I, if I should die,
my comrades-in-arms will bury me in style!"

 

  He dragged the heavy spear of hardened Socus
squelching out of his own wound and bulging shield.
As the fighter tore it out the blood came gushing forth
and his heart sank. And seeing Odysseus bleeding there
the Trojan troops exulted, calling across the melee,
charging him in a mass as edging, backing off
he gave ground now, calling his own companions.
Three shattering cries he loosed at full pitch
till Odysseus' head would burst—three times
Menelaus tense for combat heard his cries
and at once he called to Ajax standing near,
"Ajax, royal son of Telamon, captain of armies,
my ears ring with his cries—Odysseus never daunted.
He sounds like a man cut off and overpowered,
mauled by Trojan ranks in the rough assault.
Quick through the onset—better save him now!
I'm afraid he may be hurt, alone with the Trojans,
brave as Odysseus is—a blow to all our troops."

 

  And Atrides led the way and Ajax took his lead,
striding on like a god until they found Odysseus
dear to Zeus but round him Trojans thronged
like tawny jackals up in the mountains swarming
round a homed stag just wounded—a hunter's hit him
with one fast shaft from his bow and the stag's escaped,
sprinting at top speed so long as his blood runs warm
and the spring in his knees still lasts . . .
But soon as the swift arrow saps his strength
the ravening carrion packs begin their feasting
off on a ridge in twilight woods until some god,
some power drives a lion down against them—claw-mad
and the panicked jackals scatter, the lion rends their prey.
So packed around Odysseus skilled and quick to maneuver
swarmed the brave bulk of Trojans—but still the hero
kept on lunging, spearing, keeping death at bay.
And in moved Ajax now, planted right beside him,
bearing that shield of his like a wall, a tower—
Trojans scattered in panic, bolting left and right
while the fighting son of Atreus led Odysseus
through the onslaught, bracing him with an arm
till a reinsman drove his team and car up close.

 

  But charging down on the Trojans Ajax killed Doryclus,
bastard son of Priam—he wounded Pandocus next,
wounded Lysander, Pyrasus, then Pylartes.
Wild as a swollen river hurling down on the flats,
down from the hills in winter spate, bursting its banks
with rain from storming Zeus, and stands of good dry oak,
whole forests of pine it whorls into itself and sweeps along
till it heaves a crashing mass of driftwood out to sea—
so glorious Ajax swept the field, routing Trojans,
shattering teams and spearmen in his onslaught.
Nor had Hector once got wind of the rampage . . .
far off on the left flank of the whole campaign
he fought his way, powering past Scamander's banks
where the heads of fighters fell in biggest numbers
and grim incessant war cries rose around tall Nestor
and battle-hard Idomeneus. Hector amidst them now
engaged them with a vengeance, doing bloody work
with lances flung and a master's horsemanship,
destroying young battalions. Still the Achaeans
never would have yielded before the prince's charge
if Paris the lord of lovely fair-haired Helen
had not put a stop to Machaon's gallant fighting,
striking the healer squarely with an arrow
triple-flanged that gouged his right shoulder.
Achaeans breathing fury feared for Machaon now:
what if the tide turned and Trojans killed the healer?
Idomeneus suddenly called to Nestor, "Pride of Achaea!
Quick, mount your chariot, mount Machaon beside you—
lash your team to the warships, fast, full gallop!
A man who can cut out shafts and dress our wounds—
a good healer is worth a troop of other men."

 

  Nestor the noble charioteer did not resist.
He mounted his car at once as Asclepius' son,
Machaon born of the famous healer swung aboard.
He lashed the team and on they flew to the ships,
holding nothing back—that's where their spirits
drove them on to go.
But riding on with Hector
Cebriones saw the Trojan rout and shouted, "Hector!
Look at us here, engaging Argives with a vengeance,
true, but off on the fringe of brutal all-out war
while our central force is routed pell-mell,
men and chariots flung against each other.
Giant Ajax drives them—I recognize the man,
that wall of a buckler slung around his shoulders.
Hurry, head our chariot right where the fighting's thickest,
there-horse and infantry hurling into the slaughter,
hacking each other down, terrific war cries rising!"

 

  With that, Cebriones flogged their sleek team
and leaping under the whistling, crackling whip
they sped the careering car into both milling armies,
trampling shields and corpses, axle under the chariot splashed
with blood, blood on the handrails sweeping round the car,
sprays of blood shooting up from the stallions' hoofs
and churning, whirling rims. And Hector straining
to wade into the press and panicked ruck of men,
charge them, break them down—he flung terror
and stark disaster square in the Argive lines,
never pausing, giving his spear no rest.
Hector kept on ranging, battling ranks on ranks,
slashing his spear and sword and flinging heavy rocks
but he stayed clear of attacking Ajax man-to-man.

 

  But Father Zeus on the heights forced Ajax to retreat.
He stood there a moment, stunned,
then swinging his seven-ply oxhide shield behind him,
drew back in caution, throwing a fast glance
at his own Achaean troops like a trapped beast,
pivoting, backpedaling, step by short step . . .
Like a tawny lion when hounds and country field hands
drive him out of their steadings filled with cattle—
they'll never let him tear the rich fat from the oxen,
all night long they stand guard but the lion craves meat,
he lunges in and in but his charges gain him nothing,
thick-and-fast from their hardy arms the javelins
rain down in his face, and waves of blazing torches—
these the big cat fears, balking for all his rage,
and at dawn he slinks away, his spirits dashed.
So Ajax slowly drew back from the Trojans,
spirits dashed, and*much against his will,
fearing the worst for Achaea's waiting ships.
Like a stubborn ass some boys lead down a road . . .
stick after stick they've cracked across his back
but he's too much for them now, he rambles into a field
to ravage standing crops. They keep beating his ribs,
splintering sticks—their struggle child's play
till with one final shove they drive him off
but not before he's had his fill of feed.
So with Telamon's son Great Ajax then—
vaunting Trojans and all their far-flung allies
kept on stabbing his shield, full center, no letup.
And now the giant fighter would summon up his fury,
wheeling on them again, beating off platoons
of the stallion-breaking Trojans—and now again
he'd swerve around in flight. But he blocked them all
from hacking passage through to the fast trim ships
as Ajax all alone, battling on mid-field between
Achaean and Trojan lines, would stand and fight.
Some spears that flew from the Trojans' hardy arms,
hurtling forward, stuck fast in his huge shield
but showers of others, cut short
halfway before they could graze his gleaming skin,
stuck in the ground, still lusting to sink in flesh.

 

  But Euaemon's shining son Eurypylus saw him
overwhelmed by the Trojans' dense barrage of spears.
Up to his side he dashed and flanked Great Ajax tight,
let fly with a spear and the glinting spearpoint hit
the son of Phausias, Apisaon captain of armies,
square in the liver, up under the midriff—
his knees went limp as Eurypylus rushed in,
starting to rip the armor off his shoulders.
But now Paris spotted him stripping Apisaon,
drew his bow at Eurypylus, fast—he shot well
and the arrow struck him full in the right thigh
but the shaft snapped, the thigh weighed down with pain.
Eurypylus staggered back to his massing comrades,
dodging death, and shouted a stark piercing cry:
"Friends—lords of the Argives, all our captains!
Come, wheel round-stand firm!
Beat the merciless day of death from Ajax,
overpowered, look, by a pelting rain of spears.
He can't escape, I tell you, not this wrenching battle.
Stand up to them—ring Great Ajax, Telamon's son."

 

  So wounded Eurypylus pleaded, friends around him
crowding, bracing shields against their shoulders,
spears brandished high
and back to the bulking front came giant Ajax now.
The fighter turned on his heels and took his stand,
once he reached that wedge of Argive comrades.

 

  So on they fought like a mass of swirling fire
as Neleus' foaming mares bore Nestor clear of battle
and bore Machaon the expert healer too . . .
But now
the brilliant runner Achilles watched and marked him—
there he stood on the stem of his looming hollow hull,
looking out over the uphill work and heartsick rout of war.
He called at once to his friend-in-arms Patroclus,
shouting down from the decks. Hearing Achilles,
forth he came from his shelter,
striding up like the deathless god of war
but from that moment on his doom was sealed.
The brave son of Menoetius spoke out first:
"Why do you call, Achilles? Do you need me?"
And the swift runner Achilles answered quickly,
"Son of Menoetius, soldier after my own heart,
now I think they will grovel at my knees,
our Achaean comrades begging for their lives.
The need has reached them—a need too much to bear.
Go now, Patroclus dear to Zeus, and question Nestor.
Who's that wounded man he's bringing in from the fighting?
He looks to me like Machaon from behind, clearly,
Machaon head to foot, Asclepius' only son.
But I never saw his eyes—the team sped by me,
tearing on full tilt."
Patroclus obeyed his great friend
and off at a run he went along the ships and shelters.

 

  Now, as soon as the others reached Nestor's tent
they climbed down on the earth that feeds us all.
The driver Eurymedon freed the old man's team.
The men themselves dried off their sweat-soaked shirts,
standing against the wind that whipped along the surf,
then entered the tent and took their seats on settles.
And well-kempt Hecamede mixed them a bracing drink,
the woman that old King Nestor won from Tenedos
when Achilles stormed it, proud Arsinous' daughter,
the prize the Achaeans chose to give to Nestor
because he excelled them all at battle-tactics.
First Hecamede pushed a table up toward them,
handsome, sanded smooth, with blue enamel legs,
and on it she set a basket, braided in bronze
with onions in it, a relish for the drink,
and pale gold honey along with barley meal,
the grain's blessed yield. And there in the midst
the grand, glowing cup the old king brought from home,
studded with golden nails, fitted with handles,
four all told and two doves perched on each,
heads bending to drink and made of solid gold
and twin supports ran down to form the base.
An average man would strain to lift it off the table
when it was full, but Nestor, old as he was,
could hoist it up with ease.
In this cup the woman skilled as a goddess
mixed them a strong drink with Pramnian wine,
over it shredded goat cheese with a bronze grater
and scattered barley into it, glistening pure white,
then invited them to drink when she had mulled it all.
Now as the two men drank their parching thirst away
and had just begun to please themselves with talk,
confiding back and forth—there stood Patroclus
tall at the threshold, vivid as a god . . .
Old Nestor saw him at once and started up
from his polished chair, warmly grasped his hand
and led Patroclus in, pressing him to sit.
But standing off to the side his guest declined:
"No time to sit, old soldier dear to the gods.
You won't persuade me. Awesome and quick to anger,
the man who sent me here to find out who's been wounded,
the one you've just brought in. But I can see him—
I recognize Machaon myself, the expert healer.
So back I go to give Achilles the message.
Well you know, old soldier loved by the gods,
what sort of man he is-that great and terrible man.
Why, he'd leap to accuse a friend without a fault."

 

  But Nestor the noble charioteer replied at length,
"Now why is Achilles so cast down with grief
for this or that Achaean winged by a stray shaft?
He has no idea of the anguish risen through the army!
Look—our finest champions laid up in the ships,
all hit by arrows or,run through by spears . . .
there's powerful Diomedes brought down by an archer,
Odysseus wounded, and Agamemnon too, the famous spearman,
and Eurypylus took a shaft in the thigh, and here,
Machaon—I just brought him in from the fighting,
struck down by an arrow whizzing off the string.
But Achilles, brave as he is, he has no care,
no pity for our Achaeans. How long will he wait?
Till our ships that line the shore go up in flames,
gutted, despite a last-ditch stand? And we ourselves
are mowed down in droves?
  And I, what good am I?
My limbs are gnarled now, the old power's gone.
Oh make me young again,
and the strength inside me steady as a rock!
As fresh as I was that time the feud broke out . . .
fighting Epeans over a cattle-raid I killed Itymoneus,
Hypirochus' gallant son who used to live in Elis.
I was rustling their cattle in reprisal, you see,
and he defending his herds, when a spear I hurled
caught him right in the front ranks of herdsmen—
down he went and round him his yokel drovers
scattered home in panic. And what a lovely haul,
what plunder we rounded up and herded off the plain!
Fifty herds of cattle, as many head of sheep,
as many droves of pigs and as many goat-flocks
ranging free, a hundred and fifty horses too,
strong and tawny, broodmares every one
and under the flanks of many, nursing foals.
The whole lot—
we drove them all into Pylos then, that very night,
corraling them all inside the walls of Neleus.
And father beamed, seeing how much I'd won,
a young soldier out on his first campaign.
And the heralds cried out at the break of day,
'Pylians—come collect your debts from wealthy Elis!'
And a troop of Pylian chiefs turned out in force
to carve up the spoils. The Epeans owed us all,
few as we were in Pylos, hard-pressed as well.
For mighty Heracles came against us years before,
he ground our lives out, killing off our best.
Twelve sons we were of the noble old Neleus
and I alone was left . . .
the rest of my brothers perished in that rout.
Riding high on our loss the Epeans rose in arms,
lording over us, harassing us with outrage after outrage.
So now, out of Epean spoils, the old king chose
a herd of cattle and handsome flock of sheep,
three hundred head he picked, the herdsmen too.
For wealthy Elis owed my father a heavy debt:
four prizewinning thoroughbreds, chariot and all.
They'd gone to the games, primed to race for the tripod,
but Augeas the warlord commandeered them on the spot
and sent the driver packing, sick for his team.
So now old Neleus, still enraged at it all—
the threats to his man, the naked treachery—
helped himself to a priceless treasure trove
but gave the rest to his people to divide,
so none would go deprived of his fair share.
But just as we were parceling out the plunder
and offering victims to the gods around the city,
right on the third day they came, the Epeans massed
in a swarm of men and plunging battle-stallions struck
at the border, full force—and square in their midst
the two Moliones armed to the hilt, and still boys,
not quite masters yet in the ways of combat.
Now then,
there's a frontier fortress, Thryoessa perched on cliffs,
far off above the Alpheus, at the edge of sandy Pylos.
The Epeans ringed that fort, keen to raze its walls,
but once their troops had swept the entire plain,
down Athena rushed to us in the night, a herald
down from Olympus crying out, 'To arms! to arms!'
Nor did Pallas muster a slow, unwilling army
there in Pylos, all of us spoiling for a fight.
But Neleus would not let me arm for action—
he'd hidden away my horses,
thought his boy still green at the work of war.
So I had to reach the front lines on foot
but I shone among our horsemen all the same—
that's how Athena called the turns of battle.
Listen. There is a river, the Minyeos
emptying into the sea beside Arene's walls,
and there we waited for Goddess Dawn to rise,
the Pylian horse in lines while squads of infantry
came streaming up behind. Then, from that point on,
harnessed in battle-armor, moving at forced march
our army reached the Alpheus' holy ford at noon.
There we slaughtered fine victims to mighty Zeus,
a bull to Alpheus River, a bull to lord Poseidon
and an unyoked cow to blazing-eyed Athena.
And then through camp we took our evening meal
by rank and file, and caught what sleep we could,
each in his gear along the river rapids.
And all the while
those vaunting Epeans were closing round the fortress,
burning to tear it down. But before they got the chance
a great work of the War-god flashed before their eyes!
Soon as the sun came up in flames above the earth
we joined battle, lifting a prayer to Zeus and Pallas.
And just as our two opposing armies clashed
I was the first to kill a man and seize his team,
the spearman Mulius, son-in-law to their king
and wed to his eldest daughter, blond Agamede,
skilled with as many drugs as the wide world grows.
Just as he lunged I speared the man with a bronze lance
and Mulius pitched in the dust as I, I swung aboard his car
and I took my place in our front ranks of champions.
How those hot-blooded Epeans scattered in terror!
Scuttling left and right when they saw him down,
their chariot captain who'd outfought them all.
Now I charged their lines like a black tornado,
I captured fifty chariots there, and each time
two men bit the dust, crushed beneath my spear.
Now I would have destroyed the young Moliones,
Actor's sons—if their real father, Poseidon,
lord god of the open sea who shakes the earth,
had not snatched them out of the fighting then,
shrouded them round in clouds.
But now Zeus gave our Pylians stunning triumph!
Pushing Epeans north on the spreading plain we went,
killing their troops, gathering up their burnished gear,
far as Buprasion rich in wheat our chariots rolled,
all the way to Olenian Rock and the high ground
they call Alesion Hill—but there, at last,
Pallas Athena turned our forces back.
I killed my last man there, I left him dead.
There our Achaeans swung round from Buprasion,
heading their high-strung horses back to Pylos
where all gave glory to Zeus among the gods
and among all men to Nestor.
  So, such was I
in the ranks of men . . . or was it all a dream?
  This Achilles—
he'll reap the rewards of that great courage of his
alone, I tell you-weep his heart out far too late,
when our troops are dead and gone.
My friend, remember your father's last commands?
That day he sent you out of Phthia to Agamemnon.
We were both there inside, I and Prince Odysseus
heard it all in the halls, all your father told you.
We'd come to the strong and storied house of Peleus,
out for recruits across Achaea's good green land.
There inside we found the old soldier Menoetius,
found you too, and Achilles close beside you,
and the old horseman Peleus tending, burning
the fat thighs of an ox to thundering Zeus,
deep in the walled enclosure of his court.
He was lifting a golden cup and pouring wine,
glistening wine to go with the glowing victim.
You two were busy over the carcass, carving meat
when we both appeared and stood at the broad doors.
Achilles sprang to his feet, he seemed startled,
clasped the two of us by the hand and led us in—
he pressed us to take a seat and set before us
sumptuous stranger's fare, the stranger's right.
And once we'd had our fill of food and drink,
I led off with our plan, inviting the two of you
to come campaign with us. How willing you were!
And your fathers filled your ears with marching orders.
The old horseman Peleus urging his son Achilles,
'Now always be the best, my boy, the bravest,
and hold your head up high above the others.'
And Actor's son Menoetius urging you, 'My child,
Achilles is nobler than you with his immortal blood
but you are older. He has more power than you, by far,
but give him sound advice, guide him, even in battle.
Achilles will listen to you—for his own good.'
So the old man told you. You've forgotten.
But even now,
late as it is, you could tell your Achilles all this
and your fiery friend might listen. Who knows?
With a god's help you just might rouse him now,
bring his fighting spirit round at last.
The persuasion of a comrade has its powers.
But if down deep some prophecy makes him balk,
some doom his noble mother revealed to him from Zeus,
at least let Achilles send Patroclus into battle.
Let the whole Myrmidon army follow your command—
you might bring some light of victory to our Argives!
And let him give you his own fine armor to wear in war
so the Trojans might take you for him, Patroclus, yes,
hold off from attack, and Achaea's fighting sons
get second wind, exhausted as they are . . .
Breathing room in war is all too brief.
You're fresh, unbroken. They're bone-weary from battle—
you could roll those broken Trojans back to Troy,
clear of our ships and shelters!"
  So old Nestor urged
and the fighting spirit leapt inside Patroclus--
he dashed back by the ships toward Achilles.
But sprinting close to King Odysseus' fleet
where the Argives met and handed down their laws,
the grounds where they built their altars to the gods,
there he met Eurypylus, Euaemon's gallant son,
wounded, the arrow planted deep in his thigh,
and limping out of battle . . .
The sweat was streaming down his face and back
and the dark blood still flowed from his ugly wound
but the man's will was firm, he never broke his stride.
And moved at the sight, the good soldier Patroclus
burst out in grief with a flight of winging words,
"Poor men! Lords of the Argives, 0 my captains!
How doomed you are, look-far from your loved ones
and native land—to glut with your shining fat
the wild dogs of battle here in Troy . . .
But come, tell me, Eurypylus, royal fighter,
can the Achaeans, somehow, still hold monstrous Hector?—
or must they all die now, beaten down by his spear?"

 

  Struggling with his wound, Eurypylus answered,
"No hope, Patroclus, Prince. No bulwark left.
They'll all be hurled back to the black ships.
All of them, all our best in the old campaigns
are laid up in the hulls, they're hit by arrows,
pierced by spears, brought down by Trojan hands
while the Trojans' power keeps on rising, rising!
Save me at least. Take me back to my black ship.
Cut this shaft from my thigh. And the dark blood—
wash it out of the wound with clear warm water.
And spread the soothing, healing salves across it,
the powerful drugs they say you learned from Achilles
and Chiron the most humane of Centaurs taught your friend.
And as for our own healers, Podalirius and Machaon,
one is back in the shelters, wounded, I think—
Machaon needs a good strong healer himself,
he's racked with pain. The other's still afield,
standing up to the Trojans' slashing onslaught."

 

  The brave son of Menoetius answered quickly,
"Impossible. Eurypylus, hero, what shall we do?
I am on my way with a message for Achilles,
our great man of war—the. plan that Nestor,
Achaea's watch and ward, urged me to report.
But I won't neglect you, even so, with such a wound."

 


  And bracing the captain, arm around his waist,
he helped him toward his shelter. An aide saw them
and put some oxhides down. Patroclus stretched him out,
knelt with a knife and cut the sharp, stabbing arrow
out of Eurypylus' thigh and washed the wound clean
of the dark running blood with clear warm water.
Pounding it in his palms, he crushed a bitter root
and covered over the gash to kill his comrade's pain,
a cure that fought off every kind of pain . . .
and the wound dried and the flowing blood stopped

And so under shelter now Menoetius' fighting son
was healing Eurypylus' wounds. But hordes of men fought on,
the Achaean and Trojan infantry going hand-to-hand.
The Argive trench could not hold out much longer,
nor could the rampart rearing overhead, the wide wall
they raised to defend the ships and the broad trench
they drove around it all—they never gave the gods
the splendid sacrifice the immortals craved,
that the fortress might protect the fast ships
and the bulking plunder heaped behind its, shield.
Defying the deathless gods they built that wall
and so it stood there steadfast no long time.
While Hector still lived and Achilles raged on
and the warlord Priam's citadel went unstormed,
so long the Achaeans' rampart stood erect.
But once the best of the Trojan captains fell,
and many Achaeans died as well while some survived,
and Priam's high walls were stormed in the tenth year
and the Argives set sail for the native land they loved—
then, at last, Poseidon and Lord Apollo launched their plan
to smash the rampart, flinging into it all the rivers' fury.
All that flow from the crests of Ida down to breaking surf,
the Rhesus and the Heptaporus, Caresus and. the Rhodius,
Grenicus and Aesepus, and the shining god Scamander
and Simois' tides where tons of oxhide shields
and homed helmets tumbled deep in the river silt
and a race of men who seemed half god, half mortal.
The channels of all those rivers—Apollo swung them round
into one mouth and nine days hurled their flood against the wall
and Zeus came raining down, cloudburst powering cloudburst,
the faster to wash that rampart out to open sea.
The Earth-shaker himself, trident locked in his grip,
led the way, rocking loose, sweeping up in his breakers
all the bastion's strong supports of logs and stones
the Achaeans prized in place with grueling labor . . .
He made all smooth along the rip of the Hellespont
and piled the endless beaches deep in sand again
and once he had leveled the Argives' mighty wall
he turned the rivers flowing back in their beds again
where their fresh clear tides had run since time began.

 

  So in the years to come Poseidon and god Apollo
would set all things to rights once more.
But now
the war, the deafening crash of battle blazed
around the strong-built work, and rampart timbers
thundered under the heavy blows as Argive fighters
beaten down by the lash of Zeus were rolled back,
pinned to their beaked ships in dread of Hector,
that invincible headlong terror.
On he fought like a whirlwind, staunch as always—
think of the hounds and huntsmen circling round
some lion or boar when the quarry wheels at bay,
rippling in strength as the men mass like a bastion
standing up to his charge and hurl their pelting spears
and the boar's brave spirit never flinches, never bolts
and his own raw courage kills him—time and again
he wheels around, testing the huntsmen's ranks
and where he lunges out the ranks of men give way.
So Hector lunged into battle, rallying cohorts now,
spurring them on to cross the gaping trench—
but his own rearing stallions lacked the nerve.
They balked, whinnying shrill at the edge, the brink--
a dead stop-frightened off by the trench so broad
the team could never leap it, not at a single bound,
nor could they plunge on through with any ease.
Steep banks overhung its whole length, jutting up
on either side and topped by stabbing rows of stakes,
planted there by the Argives, thickset and huge
to block the enemy's onslaught.
No light work for the teams that trundled chariots
churning massive wheels to make it through in stride
but the Trojans strained to bring it off on foot.
So Polydamas stood by headstrong Hector, warning,
"Hector—and all our Trojan captains, allies-in-arms!
It's madness to drive our teams across that trench,
impossible to traverse it. Look, the sharp stakes
jutting right at the edge, and just beyond that
the Achaeans' sturdy rampart. No room there
for charioteers to dismount and fight it out,
the strait's too narrow, cramped—
we'll take a mauling there, I see it all!
If mighty Zeus, thundering up on high, is bent
on wiping out the Argives, down to the last man,
if he longs to back our Trojan forces to the hilt,
by heaven I hope the Father works his will at once
and the Argives die here, their memory blotted out,
a world away from Argos!
But what if they round on us?
If the Argives roll us back away from the ships,
trapped and tangled there in the yawning trench,
no runner, I tell you, pressed by an Argive rally,
could struggle free and bear the news to Troy.
So come, do as I say, and let us all unite.
Drivers, rein your horses hard by the trench—
the men themselves, armed for assault on foot,
we all follow Hector, all in a mass attack.
And the Argives? They cannot hold their line,
not if the ropes of death are knotted round their necks!"

 

  So Polydamas urged. His plan won Hector over—
less danger, more success—and down he leapt
from his chariot fully armed and hit the ground.
Nor did the other chariot-drivers hold formation—
all dismounted, seeing shining Hector leap to earth.
Each man shouted out commands to his driver, quickly,
"Rein the team by the trench, good battle-order now!"
And the fighters split apart and then closed ranks,
marshaled in five battalions, captains leading each.

 

  The men who trooped with Hector and Prince Polydamas—
they were the greatest force, the best and bravest,
grim set above all the rest to breach the wall
and go for the beaked ships and fight it out.
Cebriones followed close, third in command
since Hector left another to rein his team,
a driver less than Cebriones, less a fighter.
The second Trojan battalion Paris led in anus
with Alcathous and Agenor. Helenus led the third
with Deiphobus striding on like a god beside him,
two sons of Priam; captain Asius third in command,
Asius son of Hyrtacus—hulking, fiery stallions
bore him in from Arisbe, from the Selleis River.
The fourth battalion marched with gallant Aeneas,
Anchises' offspring flanked by Antenor's two sons,
Acamas and Archelochus drilled for every foray.
Sarpedon marshaled the famous allies, placing Glaucus
next in command with the combat veteran Asteropaeus,
head and shoulders the best men, Sarpedon thought,
after himself of course: he outshone the rest.
Now shield against oxhide shield, wedging tight,
with a wild rush they charged the Argives head-on,
never thinking the Argive line could still hold out—
they'd all be hurled back on their blackened hulls.

 

  So all the Trojans and famous friends-in-arms
embraced Polydamas' plan, the faultless chieftain.
But Asius captain of armies, Hyrtacus' son refused
to leave his horses there with a driver reining back—
and on he drove at the fast trim ships, chariot and all,
the fool. Vaunting along the hulls with team and car
but never destined to slip past the deadly spirits,
never to ride in glory home to windswept Troy.
Long before, his accursed doom blacked him out
with Idomeneus' spear, Deucalion's noble son.
Now left of the ships he sped where Argive ranks
would head home from the plain with teams and cars.
Here Asius flogged his team and chariot hard,
nor did he find the gates shut, the bolt shot home,
not yet, the men still held them wide, hoping to save
some comrade fleeing, the onset, racing for the ships.
Straight at the gates he lashed his team, hell-bent,
his troops crowding behind him shouting war cries,
never thinking the Argive line could stir hold out—
they'd all be hurled back on their blackened hulls.
Idiots. There in the gates they found two men,
a brace of two great fighters,
lionhearted sons of the Lapith spearmen,
one Pirithous' offspring, rugged Polypoetes,
the other Leonteus, a match for murderous Ares.
Both warriors planted there before the towering gates
rose like oaks that rear their crests on a mountain ridge,
standing up to the gales and driving rains, day in,- day out,
their giant roots branching, gripping deep in the earth:
so these two, trusting all to their arms, their power,
stood up to Asius' headlong charge and never shrank.
On the Trojans came, straight for the rock-tight wall,
raising rawhide shields and yelling their lungs out,
grouped under captain Asius, lamenus and Orestes
and Asius' own son Adamas, Thoon and Oenomaus.
The Lapiths had just been rousing Argives packed
behind the rampart: "Close in a ring—defend the ships!"
But soon as the Lapiths saw the Trojans storm the wall,
and cries broke from the Argives lost in sudden panic,
then the two burst forth to fight before the gates
like wild boars, a pair of them up on the hilltops
bracing to take some breakneck rout of men and dogs
and the two go slanting in on the charge, shattering timber
round about them, shearing off the trunks at the roots
and a grinding, screeching clatter of tusks goes up
till a hunter spears them, tears their lives out—
so the clatter screeched from the gleaming bronze
that cased their chests as blows piled on blows.
Deadly going, fighting now for all they were worth,
staking all on their own strength and friends overhead
as they ripped off rocks from the rampart's sturdy ledge
and hurled them down, defending themselves, their shelters,
their fast ships—the rocks pelted the ground like snow
that a sudden squall in fury, driving the dark clouds,
heaps thick-and-fast on the earth that feeds us all.
So the missiles showering from their hands—Achaeans,
Trojans, helmets and bossed shields clashing, ringing
shrilly under the blows of boulders big as millstones.
And now with a deep groan and pounding both thighs
Asius son of Hyrtacus cried in anguish, "Father Zeus—
so even you are an outright liar after all!
I never dreamed these heroic Argive ranks
could hold back our charge, our invincible arms.
Look, like wasps quick and pinched at the waist
or bees who build their hives on a rocky path,
they never give up their hollow house, they hold on,
keep the honey-hunters at bay, fight for their young.
So these men will never budge from the gates
though they're only two defenders—
not till they kill us all or we kill them!"
But his wailing failed to move the heart of Zeus:
it was Zeus's pleasure to hand the prize to Hector.

 

  Now squad on squad, gate to gate they fought—
but how can I tell it all, sing it all like a god?
The strain is far too great. Everywhere round the wall
the surging inhuman blaze of war leapt up the rocks—
the Argives, desperate, had no choice, they struggled now
to defend the ships, and the gods were cast down in spirit,
all who had urged the Argive soldiers on in battle . . .
But the Lapiths still kept fighting, slaughtering on.

 

  There—Pirithous' son the rugged Polypoetes
skewered Damasus, pierced his bronze-sided helmet.
None of the bronze plate could hold it, boring through
the metal and skull the brazen spearpoint pounded,
Damasus' brains splattered all inside his casque—
Polypoetes beat him down despite the Trojan's rage,
then Pylon and Ormenus, killed and stripped them both.
And the tested veteran Leonteus speared Hippomachus,
gouged Antimachus' offspring down across the belt,
then drawing his long sharp sword from its sheath
he rushed the front and took Antiphates first
with a quick thrust, stabbing at close range—
he slammed on his back, sprawled along the ground.
Then Menon, Orestes, Iamenus—Leonteus killed the lot,
crowding corpse on corpse on the earth that rears us all.

 

  While the Lapiths stripped their kills of gleaming gear
the fighters trooping behind Polydamas and Hector,
the greatest force, the best and bravest, grim set
above all to breach the wall and torch the ships,
still halted up at the trench, torn with doubt.
For suddenly, just as the men tried to cross,
a fatal bird-sign flashed before their eyes,
an eagle flying high on the left across their front
and clutching a monstrous bloody serpent in both talons,
still alive, still struggling—it had not lost its fight,
writhing back to strike it fanged the chest of its captor
right beside the throat—and agonized by the bites
the eagle flung it away to earth, dashed it down
amidst the milling fighters, loosed a shriek
and the bird veered off along the gusting wind.
The Trojans shuddered to see the serpent glistening,
wriggling at their feet, a sign from storming Zeus.
And Polydamas stood by headstrong Hector, saying,
"Hector, you always seem to attack me in assembly,
despite my good advice. Never right, is it,
for a common man to speak against you, King,
never in open council, and god forbid in war.
Our part is always to magnify your power. Well,
once again I am bound to say what I think best.
Stop the attack, don't fight them at their ships!
All will end as the omen says, I do believe,
if the bird-sign really came to us, the Trojans,
just as our fighters tried to cross the trench.
That eagle flying high on the left across our front,
clutching this bloody serpent in both its talons,
still alive—but he let the monster drop at once,
before he could sweep it back to his own home . . .
he never fed his nestlings in the end.
Nor will we.
Even if we can breach the Argives' gates and wall,
assaulting in force, and the Argives give ground,
back from the ships we'll come,
back the way we went but our battle-order ruined,
whole battalions of Trojans left behind and killed—
the Achaeans will cut us down with bronze to save their fleet!
So a knowing seer of the gods would read this omen,
someone clear in his mind and skilled with signs,
a man the Trojan armies would obey."
His helmet flashing,
Hector wheeled with a dark glance: "Enough, Polydamas!
Your pleading repels me now—
you must have something better than this to say.
But if you are serious, speaking from the heart,
the gods themselves have blotted out your senses.
You tell me to forget the plans of storming Zeus,
all he promised me when he nodded in assent?
You tell me to put my trust in birds,
flying off on their long wild wings? Never.
I would never give them a glance, a second thought,
whether they fly on the right toward the dawn and sunrise
or fly on the left toward the haze and coming dark!
No, no, put our trust in the will of mighty Zeus,
king of the deathless gods and men who die.
Bird-signs!
Fight for your country—that is the best, the only omen!
You, why are you so afraid of war and slaughter?
Even if all the rest of us drop and die around you,
grappling for the ships, you'd run no risk of death:
you lack the heart to last it out in combat-coward!
But if you hold back from the bloody foray here
or turn some other soldier back from battle,
winning him over—you with your soft appeals—
at one quick stroke my spear will beat you down,
you'll breathe your last!"
  Shouting he led the charge
and his armies swarmed behind with blood-chilling cries.
And above their onset Zeus who loves the lightning
launched from Ida's summits a sudden howling gale
that whipped a dust storm hard against the ships,
spellbinding Achaean units in their tracks,
handing glory to Hector and Hector's Trojans.
Inspired by the signs and their own raw power
all pitched in to smash the Achaeans' massive wall.
They tore at the towers' outworks, pulled at battlements,
heaving, trying to pry loose with levers the buttress stakes
Achaeans first drove in the earth to shore the rampart up—
they struggled to root these out, hoping to break down
the Achaean wall itself. But not yet did the Argives
give way to assault—no, they stopped the breaches up
with oxhide shields and down from the breastwork heights
they hurled rocks at the enemy coming on beneath the wall.

 

  And the two Aeantes ranged all points of the rampart,
calling out commands to spur their comrades' fury.
Now cheering a soldier on, tongue-lashing the next
if they marked a straggler hanging back from battle:
"Friends—you in the highest ranks of Argives,
you in the midst and you in rank and file,
we cannot all be equal in battle, ever,
but now the battle lies before us all—
come, see for yourselves, look straight' down.
Now let no fighter be turned back to the ships,
not with his captain's orders ringing in his ears--
keep pressing forward, shouting each other on!
If only Olympian Zeus the lord of lightning
grants us strength to repel this Trojan charge
then carve a passage through to Troy's high walls!"

 

So their cries urged on the Achaeans' war-lust.
Thick-and-fast as the snows that fall on a winter dawn
when Zeus who rules the world brings on a blizzard,
displaying to all mankind his weaponry of war . . .
and he puts the winds to sleep, drifting on and on
until he has shrouded over the mountains' looming peaks
and the headlands jutting sharp, the lowlands deep in grass
and the rich plowed work of farming men, and the drifts fall
on the gray salt surf and the harbors and down along the beaches
and only breakers beating against the drifts can hold them off
but all else on the earth they cover over, snows from the sky
when Zeus comes storming down—now so thick-and-fast
they volleyed rocks from both sides, some at the Trojans,
some from Trojans against the Argives, salvos landing,
the whole long rampart thundering under blows.

 

  But not even now would Trojans and Prince Hector
have burst apart the rampart's gates and huge bar
if Zeus the Master Strategist had not driven
his own son Sarpedon straight at the Argives,
strong as a lion raiding crook-homed cattle.
Quickly Sarpedon swung his shield before him—
balanced and handsome beaten bronze a bronzesmith
hammered out with layer on layer of hide inside
and stitched with golden rivets round the rim.
That splendid shield he gripped before his chest
and shaking a pair of spears went stalking out
like a mountain lion starved for meat too long
and the lordly heart inside him fires him up
to raid some stormproof fold, to go at the sheep,
and even if he should light on herdsmen at the spot,
guarding their flocks with dogs and bristling spears,
the marauder has no mind to be driven off that steading,
not without an attack. All or nothing-he charges flocks
and hauls off bloody prey or he's run through himself
at the first assault with a fast spear driven home.
So now the heart of Sarpedon stalwart as a god
impelled him to charge the wall and break it down.
He quickly called Hippolochus' son: "Glaucus,
why do they hold us both in honor, first by far
with pride of place, choice meats and brimming cups,
in Lycia where all our people look on us like gods?
Why make us lords of estates along the Xanthus' banks,
rich in vineyards and plowland rolling wheat?
So that now the duty's ours—
we are the ones to head our Lycian front,
brace and fling ourselves in the blaze of war,
so a comrade strapped in combat gear may say,
'Not without fame, the men who rule in Lycia,
these kings of ours who eat fat cuts of lamb
and drink sweet wine, the finest stock we have.
But they owe it all to their own fighting strength—
our great men of war, they lead our way in battle!'
Ah my friend, if you and I could escape this fray
and live forever, never a trace of age, immortal,
I would never fight on the front lines again
or command you to the field where men win fame.
But now, as it is, the fates of death await us,
thousands poised to strike, and not a man alive
can flee them or escape—so in we go for attack!
Give our enemy glory or win it for ourselves!"

 

  Glaucus did not turn back or shun that call—
on they charged, leading the Lycians' main mass.
And Peteos' son Menestheus cringed to see them
heading straight for his bastion, hurling ruin on . . .
He scanned the Achaean rampart: where could he find
some chief, some captain to fight disaster off his men?
He spotted the Great and Little Ajax, gluttons for battle,
flanking Teucer fresh from his shelter, side-by-side.
But Menestheus could not reach them with a shout—
the din was deafening, war cries hitting the skies,
spears battering shields and helmets' horsehair crests
and the huge gates all bolted shut, but against them there
the Trojans tensed and heaved, trying to smash them down
and force a passage through. At once Menestheus
sped a herald to Ajax: "Run for it, quick one,
call Great Ajax here—
both of them, better yet, that's best of all.
Headlong ruin's massing against us quickly.
Lycia's captains are bearing down too hard,
fierce as they always were in past attacks.
But if fighting's flaring up in their own sector,
at least let the rugged giant Ajax come alone
with Teucer the master archer at his side."

 

  A brisk command, and the runner snapped to it--
he dashed along the wall of the Argive men-at-arms
till he reached the two Aeantes, stopped and shouted,
"Ajax—Ajax! Chiefs of the Argives armed in bronze,
the favorite son of Peteos dear to immortals
needs you at his strongpoint—hurry, come,
just for a moment, meet the crisis there.
Both of you, better yet, that's best of all.
Headlong ruin's massing against us quickly.
Lycia's captains are bearing down too hard,
fierce as they always were in past attacks.
But if fighting's flaring up in your own sector,
at least let the rugged giant Ajax come alone
with Teucer the master archer at his side!"

 

  And Telamon's giant son agreed at once.
He called out to his smaller, faster brother
with orders flying, "Ajax, you stay here,
you and the burly Lycomedes stand your ground,
keep our Danaans fighting here with all they've got.
I'm on my way over there to meet this new assault—
I'll soon be back, once I've helped our friends."

 

  And with that Telamonian Ajax strode off
with his brother Teucer, his own father's son,
and Pandion cradling Teucer's long curved bow.
Holding close to the wall, they picked their way
until they reached the brave Menestheus' bastion.
There they found the defenders packed, hard-pressed
as the Lycians' stalwart lords and captains stormed
like a black tornado up against the breastworks—
both men flung themselves in attack, the war cries broke.

 

  And Telamon's son was the first to kill his man,
Sarpedon's comrade, Epicles great with heart.
He brought him down with a glinting jagged rock,
massive, top of the heap behind the rampart's edge,
no easy lift for a fighter even in prime strength,
working with both hands, weak as men are now.
Giant Ajax hoisted it high and hurled it down,
crushed the rim of the fighter's four-homed helmet
and cracked his skull to splinters, bloody pulp—
and breakneck down like a diver went the Trojan
Plunging off and away from the steep beetling tower
as life breath left his bones.
  And Glaucus next . . .
Hippolochus' brawny son was scrambling up the wall
when Teucer's arrow winged him from high aloft,
just where he saw his shoulder blade laid bare,
and stopped his lust for battle. Down he jumped
from the wall in secret, fast, so no Achaean
could see him hit and bellow out in triumph.
Soon as he noticed Glaucus slipping clear,
the pain overcame Sarpedon
but even so he never forgot his lust for battle.
He lunged in with a spear at Thestor's son Alcmaon,
stabbed him, dragged out the shaft as the victim,
caving into the spear's pull, pitched headfirst
and his fine bronze armor clashed against his corpse.
And Sarpedon clawing the rampart now with powerful hands,
wrenched hard and the whole wall came away, planks and all
and the rampart stood exposed, top defenses stripped—
Sarpedon had made a gaping breach for hundreds.

 

  But Teucer and Ajax, aiming at him together,
shot!—Teucer's arrow hitting the gleaming belt
that cinched his body-shield around his chest—
but Zeus brushed from his son the deadly spirits:
not by the ships' high stems would his Sarpedon die.
Ajax lunged at the man, he struck his shield but the point
would not pierce through, so he beat him back in rage
and he edged away from the breastwork just a yard.
Not that Sarpedon yielded all the way, never,
his heart still raced with hopes of winning glory,
whirling, shouting back to his splendid Lycians,
"Lycians—why do you slack your fighting-fury now?
It's hard for me, strong as I am, single-handed
to breach the wall and cut a path to the ships—
come, shoulder-to-shoulder!
The more we've got, the better the work will go!"

 

  So he called, and dreading their captain's scorn
they bore down fiercer, massing round Sarpedon now
but against their bulk the Argives closed ranks,
packed tight behind the wall,
and a desperate battle flared between both armies.
Lycian stalwarts could not force the Achaeans back,
breach their wall and burst through to the ships,
nor could Achaean spearmen hurl the Lycians back,
clear of the rampart, once they'd made their stand.
As two farmers wrangle hard over boundary-stones,
measuring rods in hand, locked in a common field,
and fight it out on the cramped contested strip
for equal shares of turf—so now the rocky bastion
split the troops apart and across the top they fought,
hacked at each other, chopped the oxhides round their chests,
the bucklers full and round, skin-shields, tassels flying.
Many were wounded, flesh ripped by the ruthless bronze
whenever some fighter wheeled and bared his back
but many right through the buckler's hide itself.
Everywhere—rocks, ramparts, breastworks swam
with the blood of Trojans, Argives, both sides,
but still the Trojans could not rout the Argives.
They held tight as a working widow holds the scales,
painstakingly grips the beam and lifts the weight
and the wool together, balancing both sides even,
struggling to win a grim subsistence for her children.
So powerful armies drew their battle line dead even
till, at last, Zeus gave Hector the son of Priam
the greater glory—the first to storm the wall.
Hector loosed a piercing cry at his men:
"Drive, drive, my stallion-breaking Trojans!
Breach the Achaean rampart! Hurl your fire now—
a blazing inferno of fire against their ships!"
So he cried,
driving them on, and all ears rang with his cries
and a tight phalanx launched straight at the wall,
brandishing sharp spears, swarming the bastions,
as Hector grappled a boulder, bore it up and on.
It stood at the gates, huge, blunt at the base
but spiked to a jagged point
and no two men, the best in the whole realm,
could easily prize it up from earth and onto a wagon,
weak as men are now—but he quickly raised and shook it
as Zeus the son of Cronus with Cronus' twisting ways
made it a light lift for Hector all on his own.
As a shepherd lifts a ram's fleece with ease,
plucks it up with a hand—no weight at all to him—
so Hector raised the rock, bore it straight for the doors
that blocked the gateway, powerful, thickset, the pair
towering up with two bars on the inside, crossing over
each other, shot home with a bolt to pin them firm.
Planting his body right in front, legs spread wide,
his weight in the blow to give it total impact,
Hector hurled at the gates, full center, smashing
the hinges left and right and the boulder tore through,
dropped with a crash and both gates groaned and thundered—
the doorbars could not hold, the planking shattered up
in a flying storm of splinters under the rock's force
and Hector burst through in glory, his face dark
as the sudden rushing night but he blazed on in bronze
and terrible fire broke from the gear that wrapped his body,
two spears in his fists. No one could fight him, stop him,
none but the gods as Hector hurtled through the gates
and his eyes flashed fire. And whirling round
he cried to his Trojans, shouting through the ruck,
"The wall, storm the wall!"
  They rushed to obey him,
some swarming over the top at once, others streaming in
through the sturdy gateways—Argives scattering back in terror,
back by the hollow hulls, the uproar rising, no way out, no end—

But once Zeus had driven Hector and Hector's Trojans
hard against the ships, he left both armies there,
milling among the hulls to bear the brunt
and wrenching work of war—no end in sight—
while Zeus himself, his shining eyes turned north,
gazed a world away to the land of Thracian horsemen,
the Mysian fighters hand-to-hand and the lordly Hippemolgi
who drink the milk of mares, and the Abii, most decent men alive.
But not a moment more would he turn his shining eyes to Troy.
Zeus never dreamed in his heart a single deathless god
would go to war for Troy's or Achaea's forces now.

 

  But the mighty god of earthquakes was not blind.
He kept his watch, enthralled by the rush of battle,
aloft the summit of timbered Samos facing Thrace.
From there the entire Ida ridge swung clear in view,
the city of Priam clear and the warships of Achaea.
Climbing out of the breakers, there Poseidon sat
and pitied the Argives beaten down by Trojan troops
and his churning outrage rose against the Father.

 

  Suddenly down from the mountain's rocky crags
Poseidon stormed with giant, lightning strides
and the looming peaks and tall timber quaked
beneath his immortal feet as the sea lord surged on.
Three great strides he took, on the fourth he reached his goal,
Aegae port where his famous halls are built in the green depths,
the shimmering golden halls of the god that stand forever.
Down Poseidon dove and yoked his bronze-hoofed horses
onto his battle-car, his pair that raced the wind
with their golden manes streaming on behind them,
and strapping the golden armor round his body,
seized his whip that coils lithe and gold
and boarded his chariot launching up and out,
skimming the waves, and over the swells they came,
dolphins leaving their lairs to sport across his wake,
leaping left and right—well they knew their lord.
And the sea heaved in joy, cleaving a path for him
and the team flew on in a blurring burst of speed,
the bronze axle under the war-car never flecked with foam,
the stallions vaulting, speeding Poseidon toward Achaea's fleet.

 

  There is a vast cave, down in the dark sounding depths,
mid-sea between Tenedos and Imbros' rugged cliffs . . .
Here the god of the earthquake drove his horses down,
he set them free of the yoke and flung before them
heaps of ambrosia, fodder for them to graze.
Round their hoofs he looped the golden hobbles
never broken, never slipped, so there they'd stand,
stock-still on the spot to wait their lord's return
and off Poseidon strode to Achaea's vast encampment.
But the Trojans swarmed like flame, like a whirlwind
following Hector son of Priam blazing on nonstop,
their war cries shattering, crying as one man—
their hopes soaring to take the Argive ships
and slaughter all their best against the hulls.
But the ocean king who grips and shakes the earth,
rising up from the offshore swell, urged the Argives,
taking the build and tireless voice of Calchas.
First the god commanded the Great and Little Ajax,
hungry for war as both men were already, "Ajax, Ajax!
Both of you—fight to save the Achaean armies,
call up your courage, no cringing panic now!
At other points on the line I have no fear
of the Trojans' hands, invincible as they seem—
troops who had stormed our massive wall in force—
our men-at-arms will hold them all at bay.
But here i fear the worst, I dread a breakthrough.
Here this firebrand, rabid Hector leads the charge,
claiming to be the son of high and mighty Zeus.
But the two of you, if only a god could make you
stand fast yourselves, tense with all your power,
and command the rest of your men to stand fast too—
then you could hurl him back from the deep-sea ships,
hard as he hurls against you, even if Zeus himself
impels the madman on."
  In the same breath the god
who shakes the mainland struck both men with his staff
and filled their hearts with strength and striking force,
put spring in their limbs, their feet and fighting hands.
Then off he sped himself with the speed of a darting hawk
that soaring up from a sheer rock face, hovering high,
swoops at the plain to harry larks and swallows—
so the lord of the earthquake sped away from both.
First of the two to. know the god was rapid Ajax.
Oileus' son alerted Telamon's son at once:
"Ajax, since one of the gods who hold Olympus,
a god in a prophet's shape, spurs us on to fight
beside the ships—and I tell you he's not Calchas,
seer of the gods who scans the flight of birds . . .
The tracks in his wake, his stride as he sped away—
I know him at once, with ease—no mistaking the gods.
And now, what's more, the courage inside my chest
is racing faster for action, full frontal assault—
feet quiver beneath me, hands high for the onset!"

 

  And Telamonian Ajax joined him, calling out,
"I can feel it too, now, the hands on my spear,
invincible hands quivering tense for battle, look—
the power rising within me, feet beneath me rushing me on!
I even long to meet this Hector in single combat,
blaze as he does nonstop for bloody war!"

 

  So they roused each other, exulting in the fire,
the joy of battle the god excited in their hearts.
And he sped to the rear to stir more ranks of Argives,
men refreshing their strength against the fast ships,
dead on their feet from the slogging work of war—
and anguish caught their hearts to see the Trojans,
troops who had stormed their massive wall in force.
They watched that assault, weeping freely now . . .
they never thought they would fight free of death.
But a light urging sent by the god of earthquakes
rippled through their lines and whipped battalions on.
Spurring Teucer and Leitus first with bracing orders,
then the fighting Peneleos, Thoas and Deipyrus,
Meriones and Antilochus, both strong with the war cry,
Poseidon pressed them on with winging charges: "Shame—
you Argives, raw recruits—and I, I trusted in you,
certain that if you fight you'll save our ships!
But if you hang back from the grueling battle now,
your day has dawned to be crushed by Trojans. What disgrace—
a marvel right before my eyes! A terrible thing . . .
and I never dreamed.the war would come to this:
the Trojans advancing all the way to our ships,
men who up till now had panicked like deer,
food in the woods for jackals, leopards, wolves—
helpless, racing for dear life, all fight gone.
For months on end the Trojans would have no heart
to stand and face the Argives' rage and bloody hands.
Not for a moment. Ah but now, quite exposed,
far from Troy they battle around our hollow ships,
thanks to our leader's weakness, our armies' slacking off.
Our men fight with him. They'd rather drop and die
by our fast trim ships than rise to their defense.
And what if it's all true and the man's to blame—
lord of the far-flung kingdoms, hero Agamemnon—
because he spurned the famous runner Achilles?
How on earth can we hang back from combat now?
Heal our feuds at once! Surely they can be healed,
the hearts of the brave. How can you hold back
your combat-fury any longer? Not with honor—
you, the finest men in all our ranks . . .
Why, not even I would rail against that man,
that worthless coward who cringes from the fighting.
But you, I round on you with all my heart. Weaklings!
You'll make the crisis worse at any moment with this,
this hanging back. Each of you get a grip on yourself—
where's your pride, your soldier's sense of shame?
A great battle rises before us! Look—Hector
the king of the war cry fights beside our ships,
assaulting in all his force. Hector's crashed our gates,
he's burst the tremendous bar!"
  His voice like a shock wave,
the god of the earthquake spurred the Argive fighters on—
battalions forming around the two Aeantes, full strength,
crack battalions the god of war would never scorn,
rearing midst their ranks, nor would Pallas Athena
driver of armies. Here were the best picked men
detached in squads to stand the Trojan charge
and shining Hector: a wall of them bulked together,
spear-by-spear, shield-by-shield, the rims overlapping,
buckler-to-buckler, helm-to-helm, man-to-man massed tight
and the horsehair crests on glittering helmet horns brushed
as they tossed their heads, the battalions bulked so dense,
shoulder-to-shoulder close, and the spears they shook
in daring hands packed into jagged lines of battle—
single-minded fighters facing straight ahead,
Achaeans primed for combat.
  Trojans pounded down on them!
Tight formations led by Hector careering breakneck on
like a deadly rolling boulder torn from a rock face—
a river swollen with snow has wrenched it from its socket,
immense floods breaking the bank's grip, and the reckless boulder
bounding high, flying with timber rumbling under it,
nothing can stop it now, hurtling on undaunted
down, down till it hits the level plain
and then it rolls no more for all its wild rush.
So Hector threatened at first to rampage through
the Argives' ships and shelters and reach the sea
with a single sudden charge, killing all the way.
But once he crashed against those dense battalions
dead in his tracks he stopped, crushed up against them:
sons of Achaea faced him now, stabbing away with swords,
with two-edged spears, hoisting him off their lines—
and he gave ground, staggering, reeling, shouting out
to his troops with shrill cries, "Trojans! Lycians!
Dardan skirmishers hand-to-hand—stand by me here!
They cannot hold me off any longer, these Achaeans,
not even massed like a wall against me here—
they'll crumble under my spear, well I know,
if the best of immortals really drives me on,
Hera's lord whose thunder drums the sky!"
So he shouted,
lashing the rage and fighting-fury in every Trojan.
And breaking out of their ranks Deiphobus strode,
the son of Priam fired for feats of arms, there,
thrusting his balanced round buckler before him,
step by springy step on the balls of his feet,
pressing forward under his shield. But Meriones,
taking aim at Deiphobus, hurled his flashing spear
and struck—no miss!—right in the bull's-hide boss
but the spear did not ram through, far from it,
the long shaft snapped at the spearhead's socket—
the Trojan had thrust his shield at arm's length,
shrinking before the expert marksman's lance.
But now Meriones pulled back to his cohorts,
stung with rage for two defeats at once:
victory shattered„ spearshaft smashed to bits.
He went on the run to Achaea's ships and shelters,
out for the heavy lance he'd left aslant his hut.,

 

  The rest fought on with deafening war cries rising.
Teucer was first to kill his man, a son of Mentor,
breeder of stallions, the rugged spearman Imbrius.
He had lived in Pedaeon, before the Argives came,
and wed a bastard daughter of Priam, Medesicaste,
but once the rolling ships of Achaea swept ashore,
home he came to Troy where he shone among the Trojans,
living close to Priam, who prized him like his sons.
Under his ear Great Ajax stabbed with a heavy lance,
wrenched the weapon out and down he went like a tall ash
on a landmark mountain ridge that glistens far and wide—
chopped down by an ax, its leaves running with sap,
strewn across the earth . . . So Imbrius fell,
the fine bronze armor clashing against him hard.
Teucer charged forward, mad to strip that gear
but as Teucer charged, Hector flung his lance—
a glint of bronze—but the Argive saw it coming,
dodged to the side and it missed him by an inch
and hit Amphimachus, Cteatus' son and Actor's heir,
the shaft slashed his chest as he ran toward the front
and down he went, thundering, armor clanging round him.
And Hector rushed to tear the helmet off his head,
snug on Amphimachus' brows, the gallant soldier—
Hector rushing in and Ajax lunged with a spear
yet the burnished weapon could not pierce his skin,
Hector's whole body was cased in tremendous bronze.
But Ajax did stab home at the shield's jutting bulge,
beating Hector back with enormous driving force
and he gave ground, back and away from both corpses
as Argives hauled them from the fighting by the heels.
The captains of Athens, Stichius, staunch Menestheus,
bore Amphimachus back to Achaea's waiting lines.
But the two Aeantes blazing in battle-fury
saw to Imbrius now . . . as two lions seizing a goat
from under the guard of circling rip-tooth hounds,
lugging the carcass on through dense matted brush,
hoist it up from the earth in their big grinding jaws.
So the ramping, crested Aeantes hoisted Imbrius high,
stripping his gear in mid-air, and the Little Ajax,
raging over Amphimachus' death, lopped the head
from the corpse's limp neck and with one good heave
sent it spinning into the milling fighters like a ball,
right at the feet of Hector, tumbling in the dust.

 

  And then the heart of Poseidon quaked with anger—
his own grandson brought down in the bloody charge.
He surged along the Achaean ships and shelters,
spurring Argives, piling griefs on Trojans.
The famous spearman Idomeneus crossed his path—
he'd come from a friend who just emerged from battle
gashed in back of the kneecap, gouged by whetted bronze:
That soldier the comrades carried off but Idomeneus,
giving the healers orders, made for his own tent
though he still yearned for action face-to-face.
And the god of earthquakes only fueled his fire,
taking the voice of Thoas, son of Andraemon,
king over all Pleuron, craggy Calydon too
and Aetolian men he ruled revered him like a god:
"Idomeneus, captain of Cretans under arms—
where have the threats all gone
that sons of Achaea leveled at these Trojans?"

 

  The Cretan captain Idomeneus answered, "Thoas
no man's to blame now, so far as I can tell.
Every one of us knows the ropes in war.
No one here's in the grip of bloodless fear,
collapsing in cowardice, ducking the grim assault.
No, this is the pleasure of overweening Zeus, it seems—
to kill the Achaeans here, our memory blotted out
a world away from Argos. But you, Thoas,
you who were always rock-steady in battle
and braced the ones you saw go slack and flinch—
don't quit now, Thoas, urge each man you find!"

 

  The god of earthquakes answered back, "Idomeneus—
may that man, that coward never get home from Troy—
let him linger here, ripping sport for the dogs,
whoever shirks the fight while this day lasts.
Quick, take up your gear and off we go.
Shoulder-to-shoulder, swing to the work, we must—
just two as we are—if we hope to make some headway.
The worst cowards, banded together, have their power
but you and I have got the skill to fight their best!"

 

  With that he strode away, a god in the wars of men.
As soon as Idomeneus reached his well-built shelter
he strapped his burnished armor round his body,
grasped two spears and out he ran like a lightning bolt
the Father grips and flings from brilliant Olympus,
a dazzling sign to men—a blinding forked flash.
So the bronze flared on his chest as out he rushed
but his rough-and-ready aide-in-arms Meriones
intercepted him just outside the tent . . .
He was on his way for a new bronze spear to use
and staunch Idomeneus shouted out, "Meriones—
racing son of Molus, brother-in-arms, old friend,
why back from the lines, why leave the fight behind?
Taken a wound, some spearhead sapped your strength?
Or come with a word for me? Does someone need me?
I have no mind to sit it out in the shelters—
what I love is battle!"
  Never flustered,
the cool-headed Meriones took his point:
"Idomeneus, captain of Cretans under arms,
I've come for a spear to fight with,
if you still have one left inside your tents.
I've just splintered the lance I used to carry,
smashed it against his shield—swaggering Deiphobus."

 

  But the Cretan captain Idomeneus countered, "Spears?
If it's. spears you want, you'll find not one but twenty,
all propped on my shelter's shining inner wall:
Trojan weapons, stripped from the men I kill.
It's not my way, I'd say, to fight at a distance,
out of enemy range.
So I take my plunder—spears, bossed shields,
helmets and breastplates, gleaming, polished bright."

 

  "And so do I, by god!"-the cool Meriones blazed up
in his own defense-"They crowd my ship and shelter,
hoards of Trojan plunder, but out of reach just now.
Though I never forgot my courage, I can tell you—
not I, there at the front where we win glory,
there I take my stand whenever a pitched battle
rears its head. Another Achaean armed in bronze
may well be blind to the way I fight. Not you—
you are the one who knows me best, I'd say."

 

  And the Cretan captain Idomeneus answered warnly,
"I know your style, your courage. No need for you to tell it.
If we all formed up along the ships right now,
our best men picked for an ambush—
that's where you really spot a fighter's mettle,
where the brave and craven always show their stripes.
The skin of the coward changes color all the time,
he can't get a grip on himself, he can't sit still,
he squats and rocks, shifting his weight from foot to foot,
his heart racing, pounding inside the fellow's ribs,
his teeth chattering—he dreads some grisly death.
But the skin of the brave soldier never blanches.
He's all control. Tense but no great fear.
The moment he joins his comrades packed in ambush
he prays to wade in carnage, cut-and-thrust at once.
Who could deny your nerve there, your fighting hands?
Why, even if you were badly wounded in battle,
winged by a shaft or gored by a blade close-up,
the weapon would never hit you behind, in neck or back—
it would pierce your chest or guts as you press forward,
lusting for all the champions' lovely give-and-take.
On with it! No more standing round like bragging boys—
someone will dress us down, and roughly too.
Off you go to my shelter. Choose a sturdy spear."

 

  Meriones a match for the rapid god of battles
ran for the tent, seized a fine bronze lance
and hot for action rushed to catch his captain.
And he went on to war as grim as murderous Ares,
his good son Panic stalking beside him, tough, fearless,
striking terror in even the combat-hardened veteran, yes,
both of them marching out of Thrace, geared to fight the Ephyri
or Phlegians great with heart, but they turn deaf ears
to the prayers of both sides at once, handing glory
to either side they choose. So on they marched,
Meriones and Idomeneus commanders of armies
strode to battle helmed in gleaming bronze,
Meriones first to ask, "Son of Deucalion,
where do you say we join the fighting now?
Right of the whole engagement, work the center
or go at the left flank? That's the place, t think—
nowhere else are the long-haired Argives so outfought."

 

  The Cretan captain Idomeneus answered quickly,
"Plenty of others can shield the ships mid-line,
the two Aeantes, Teucer the best Achaean archer,
an expert too at fighting head-to-head.
They'll give royal Hector his fill of blows,
strong on attack, glutton for battle as he is.
Berserk for blood, he'll find it uphill work
to beat their valor down, matchless hands at war,
and gut our ships with fire—unless almighty Zeus
should fling a torch at the fast trim ships himself.

 

When it comes to men, Great Ajax yields to no one,
no mortal who eats Demeter's grain, I tell you,
one you can break with bronze and volleyed rocks.
Not even Achilles who smashes whole battalions—
he would never yield to him in a stand-up fight
though in downfield racing none can touch the man.
So lead us on to the left flank—we'll soon see
if we give our enemy glory or win it for ourselves."
And quick as the god of war Meriones led the way
till they reached the front his captain pointed out.

 

  When the Trojans saw Idomeneus fierce as fire,
him and his aide-in-arms in handsome blazoned gear,
they all cried out and charged them through the press
and a sudden, pitched battle broke at the ships' stems.
As gale-winds swirl and shatter under the shrilling gusts
on days when drifts of dust lie piled thick on the roads
and winds whip up the dirt in a dense whirling cloud—
so the battle broke, storming chaos, troops inflamed,
slashing each other with bronze, carnage mounting,
manslaughtering combat bristling with rangy spears,
the honed lances brandished in hand and ripping flesh
and the eyes dazzled now, blind with the glare of bronze,
glittering helmets flashing, breastplates freshly burnished,
shields fiery in sunlight, fighters plowing on in a mass.
Only a veteran steeled at heart could watch that struggle
and still thrill with joy and never feel the terror.

 

  The two powerful sons of Cronus, Zeus and Poseidon,
their deathless spirits warring against each other,
were building mortal pains for seasoned heroes.
Zeus willing a Trojan victory, Hector's victory,
lifting the famous runner Achilles' glory higher,
but he had no lust to destroy the whole Argive force
before the walls of Troy—all the Father wanted
was glory for Thetis and Thetis' strong-willed son.
But Poseidon surging in secret out of the gray surf
went driving into the Argive ranks.and lashed them on,
agonized for the fighters beaten down by Trojans,
and his churning outrage rose against great Zeus.
Both were gods of the same line, a single father,
but Zeus was the elder-born and Zeus knew more.,
And so Poseidon shrank from defending allies
out in the open—all in secret, always
armed like a man the god kept urging armies on.
Both gods knotted the rope of strife and leveling war,
strangling both sides at once by stretching the mighty cable,
never broken, never slipped, that snapped the knees of thousands.

 

And there, grizzled gray as he was, he spurred his men,
Idomeneus ramping amidst the Trojans, striking panic.
He finished Othryoneus, a man who'd lived in Cabesus,
one who had just come at the rousing word of war
and asked for Priam's loveliest daughter, Cassandra—
with no bride-price offered—
but Othryoneus promised a mighty work of battle:
he would rout the unwilling Argives out of Troy.
And old King Priam bent his head in assent,
promised the man his daughter, so on he fought,
trusting his life to oaths taken, promises struck—
till Idomeneus took his life with a glinting spear,
struck him coming on with his high, swaggering strides.
His breastplate could not save him, the bronze he always wore,
and the shaft pierced his bowels. He fell with a crash
as Idomeneus boasted, shouting over him, "Bravo,
Othryoneus, bravo to you beyond all men alive!
If you can really keep your promise to Priam now,
who promised his daughter—a true blood-wedding day!
Look, we'll make you a promise-we'll keep it too.
We'll hand you Agamemnon's loveliest daughter,
lead her here from Argos, marry her off to you
if you'll just help us raze the walls of Troy.
Just step this way! So we can come to terms
by the deep-sea ships and strike our marriage pact—
you'll find our price for brides not quite so killing!"

 

  The hero seized his foot, dragging him through the rout.
But Asius leapt down to defend his comrade, just ahead
of his chariot-horses still held close by a driver,
the team snorting, panting over his shoulders—
Asius strained in fury to spear Idomeneus
but the Cretan took him first.
A spearhead punched his gullet under the chin
and the bronze point went ripping through his nape
and down the Trojan fell as an oak or white poplar falls
or towering pine that shipwrights up on a mountain
hew down with whetted axes for sturdy ship timber—
so he stretched in front of his team and chariot,
sprawled and roaring, clawing the bloody dust.
His driver out of his mind, what mind he had,
lost all nerve to wheel his horses round
and give the slip to his enemy's deadly hands
and staunch Antilochus speared him through the midriff.
His breastplate could not save him, the bronze he, always wore,
and the lance impaled his guts—he gasped, convulsed
and out of his well-made car the Trojan pitched—
and as for his team, proud Nestor's son Antilochus
drove them out of the Trojans into Argive lines.

 

  But raging in tears for Asius came Deiphobus
charging against Idomeneus, heaving a flashing spear—
but Idomeneus saw it coming, dodged the bronze point
by crouching under his buckler's full round cover.
He always carried it, layered with hide and ringed
with gleaming bronze, fitted with double cross-stays—
under it low he hunched and the brazen spear flew past
with a grating screech as the shaft grazed the shield.
But Deiphobus' strong swift hurl was not for nothing,
no, he caught Hypsenor, Hippasus' son the captain,
struck him under the midriff, slit his liver
and that instant the man's knees went limp.
Deiphobus shouted, vaunting in wild glory,
"Asius dies, but not without revenge!
Down to the god of death he goes, I tell you,
down to the mighty gates but thrilled at heart—
look at the escort I have sent him for the journey!"

 

  The more he gloried, the more grief swept the Argives,
brave Antilochus most, his battle-passion rising,
stunned with pain but he would not fail Hypsenor.
He ran to straddle and hide him with his shield
as a brace of comrades shouldered up the fighter:
Echius' son Mecisteus helping good Alastor
bore him back to the hollow warships, groaning hard.

 

  But Idomeneus never slacked his fury, always struggling
to plunge some Trojan soldier in deep shrouding night
or fall himself, beating disaster off his lines.
And here was a royal kill, the son of Aesyetes,
the hero Alcathous, son-in-law to Anchises,
wed to his eldest daughter, Hippodamia . . .
Her father and noble mother loved her dearly,
the pride of their halls excelling all her age
in beauty, works of the loom and good clear sense.
So the bravest man in the broad realm of Troy
took her hand in marriage, true, the very man
Poseidon crushed at the hands of Idomeneus here,
spellbinding his shining eyes, crippling his fine legs.
He couldn't escape—no retreat, no dodging the stroke,
like a pillar or tree crowned with leaves, rearing,
standing there stock-still as the hero Idomeneus
stabbed him square in the chest
and split the bronze plate that cased his ribs,
gear that had always kept destruction off his flesh
but it cracked and rang out now, ripped by the spear.
Down Alcathous crashed and the point stuck in his heart
and the heart in its last throes jerked and shook the lance—
the butt-end quivering into the air till suddenly
rugged Ares snuffed its fury out, dead still.
And Idomeneus shouted, vaunting in wild glory,
"Now, Deiphobus, now shall we call it quits at last?
Three men killed for the one you bragged about so much!
Come here, you idiot—stand up to me yourself
so you can see what cut of man I am. Look,
a son of Zeus come here to face you down.
He first bore Minos, watch and ward of Crete,
then Minos bore an illustrious son Deucalion, yes,
and Deucalion fathered me to command a race of men
through the length and breadth of Crete, and now our ships
have borne me here to your shores to be your curse,
a curse to your father, curse to the men of Troy!"

 

  So he taunted. Deiphobus' mind was torn—
should he pull back and call a friend to his side,
some hardy Trojan, or take the Argive on alone?
As he thought it out, the first way seemed the best.
He went for Aeneas, found him out on the flank
and fringe of battle, standing idle, forever
angered at Priam who always scrimped his honors,
brave as Aeneas was among the Trojan fighters.
Deiphobus reached him soon with winging words:
"Aeneas, captain, counselor, how we need you now!
Shield your sister's husband—if grief can touch your heart.
Follow me, fight for Alcathous, your brother-in-law
who reared you at home when you were just a boy.
The famous spearman Idomeneus cut him down."
Fighting words—
that began to stir the rage inside Aeneas' chest
and out for blood he charged Idomeneus now.
But nothing could make him panic-no green boy,
he stood his ground like a wild mountain boar,
trusting his strength, standing up to a rout of men
that scream and swoop against him off in a lonely copse,
the ridge of his back bristling, his eyes flashing fire,
he grinds his teeth, champing to beat back dogs and men.
So Idomeneus, famous speannan, stood his ground,
he never gave an inch with Aeneas charging in,
quick to the rescue. Idomeneus called his comrades,
glancing fast at Ascalaphus, Aphareus, Deipyrus,
Meriones and Antilochus, both strong with the war cry—
he called them closer, his winging orders flying:
"Over here, my friends! I'm all alone, defend me!
I fear Aeneas-terribly—coming on, top speed,
bearing down on me now and filled with power,
enormous power to take men down in battle.
He's just in the first flush of youth, what's more,
the greatest power of all. If we were the same age,
I tell you, just as the same fury fills us both—
at a single stroke he'd bear off glory now
or I'd bear it off myself!"
  So the Cretan yelled
and all his comrades came in a pack with one will,
massing round him, bracing shields to shoulders.
But across the lines Aeneas called his comrades,
glancing fast at Deiphobus, Paris, brave Agenor,
all the Trojan captains who backed Aeneas here,
and fighters followed close behind like flocks
that follow the lead ram, leaving the pastureland
to drink at springs, and the shepherd's heart exults.
So now the heart of Aeneas leapt inside his chest
when he saw the flocks of fighters crowding in his wake.

 

  Round Alcathous' corpse they lunged in hand-to-hand
with their long spears, and the bronze around their chests
clashed out, a terrific din as they struck each other fiercely,
the lines jamming and two fighters rearing above the rest,
Idomeneus and Aeneas, both a match for Ares, charged
with their ruthless bronze to hack each other's flesh.
Aeneas was first—he aimed and hurled at Idomeneus
but the Cretan saw it coming, dodged the brazen tip
and Aeneas' lance plunged in the earth, quivering,
his arm's power poured in a wasted shot.
  Idomeneus—
he hurled and speared Oenomaus through the belly,
smashing his corslet just where the plates join
and the bronze spearhead spilled his entrails out
and down the Trojan crashed, grasping, clawing the dust.
Idomeneus wrenched his dark shaft from the corpse
but as for the dead man's burnished gear—no use.
The chief was helpless to rip it off his shoulders—
enemy weapons jolted him back with so much force
his legs buckled, the old driving power lost,
no dash left to dive for a spear or dodge one.
So there he stood, taking it all, beating away
the ruthless-day of death. No more running now,
no quick leaps to sweep him clear of the fighting,
just backing, step by step . . .
And Deiphobus taking aim
with his big glinting spear, forever hating the man
and he hurled and missed again—
but Deiphobus hit Ascalaphus with that shaft,
Ascalaphus son of the butcher god of battles—
the heavy spearshaft ran him through the shoulder
and down he thundered, scraping, clutching the dust.
But the giant bellowing Ares had heard nothing yet
of how his son went down in the mounting carnage.
On a crest of Olympus under golden clouds he sat,
the god of war held fast by the will of Zeus, aloof
where the other deathless gods were kept back from battle.

 

  Still round Alcathous fighters kept on lunging in.
Deiphobus stripped away the corpse's gleaming helmet
but quick as the god of war Meriones leapt at him,
stabbed his outstretched arm and the blank-eyed helmet
slipped from his grasp, pounding the ground and clanging.
Meriones back on attack—a savage swoop like a vulture—
yanked the spear from the Trojan's shoulder joint
and back he drew into crowds of waiting troops.
But Polites swept up close to Deiphobus' side,
caught his brother around the waist with both arms
and dragged him clear of the heartbreaking skirmish,
far downfield till they reached his team of racers
standing behind the rear lines and rush of battle,
their driver and handsome chariot held in tow . . .
Then back to Troy they bore Deiphobus, groaning hard,
in agony, blood from his fresh wound pouring down his arm.
And still the rest fought on, relentless war cries rising.
Aeneas charging Aphareus, son of Caletor, slit open
his throat just turning toward Aeneas' ripping blade—
his head slumped to the side, shield crushing in on him,
helmet too, and courage-shattering death engulfed his corpse.
Next Antilochus, watching Thoon veer for a quick escape,
sprang and stabbed him, slashing away the whole vein
that runs the length of the back to reach the neck—
he severed it, sheared it clear
and the man went sprawling, back flat in the dust
and stretching out both hands to his friends-in-arms.
Antilochus closed to tear the gear from his shoulders,
glancing left and right as Trojans massed against him,
plunging from every side to batter down his shield
but they could not pierce that broad glistening hide—
no scoring his tender young flesh with ruthless bronze.
Not Antilochus, guarded now by the god of earthquakes
shielding, ringing the son of Nestor round, even in this,
this storm of spears. Antilochus never clear of enemies,
always wheeling, bracing to face them, his own spear
never resting, always brandished, quivering tense,
his courage primed to cut men down with a hurl
or charge them face-to-face.
His spear aimed in the melee—
but Adamas, Asius' son missed nothing, he saw it all,
rushed him, rammed Antilochus' buckler dead center
with sharp bronze but the blue-haired god Poseidon
crushed the spear, denied him the Argive's life.
Half his lance hung there in Antilochus' shield
like a charred stake, half dropped to the ground.
And back he shrank to his cohorts, dodging death
but hounding him as he went Meriones speared him
between the genitals and the navel-hideous wound,
the worst the god of battles deals to wretched men.
There the spear stuck. Hugging the shaft he writhed,
gasping, shuddering like some wild bull in the hills
that herdsmen shackle, trapping the beast with twisted ropes
and he fights them all the way as the men drag him off—
so he gasped with his wound. A little, not for long.
Till the hero Meriones moved in where he sprawled,
wrenched the spear from his corpse
and the dark came shrouding down across his eyes.

 

  Helenus charged Deipyrus, cleft the side of his head
with a massive Thracian sword, smashed his helmet
and knocked it off. It fell to earth and an Argive
snatched it up as it rolled at soldiers' feet—
and the night came blinding down Deipyrus' eyes.

 

  And anguish seized Menelaus lord of the war cry.
He went on the run at the fighting prophet Helenus,
all menace, madly shaking his whetted javelin
just as Helenus seized his bow by the handgrip.
Both let fly at each other, one launching out
with a sharp lance, one a shaft from the string—
and Helenus' arrow hit Atrides right on the chest,
on the breastplate's curve but the arrow sprang away.
High as the black-skin beans and chickpeas bounce and leap
from a big bladed shovel, flying across the threshing floor,
sped by a whistling wind and a winnower's sweeping stroke—
so the arrow flew from fighting Atrides' breastplate,
the keen shaft glancing, skittering off downfield.
But the lord of the war cry aimed for Helenus' hand
gripping his polished bow-and clean through his fist
the bronze spearhead drove and cracked the tensed weapon.
Back he fell to his massed companions, dodging death,
his hand dangling, dragging the long ashen shaft.
And gallant Agenor drew the spear from his hand
and bound it up in a band of tightly twisted wool,
a sling his aide retained for the good commander.

 

  And now Pisander rushed Menelaus famed in arms
but a grim fate was rushing him to the stroke of death—
to be crushed in this hell of war by you, Menelaus.
Just as the two men closed, heading into each other,
Attides missed-his spearshaft hooking off to the side—
Pisander stabbed his shield but the bronze could not bore through—
the huge hide blocked it, the shaft snapped at the socket.
Still the Trojan exulted, wild with hopes of triumph
as Menelaus, drawing his sword with silver studs,
leapt at Pisander, who clutched beneath his shield
his good bronze ax with its cleaving blade
set on a long smooth olive haft—
A clash!
Both fighters at one great stroke
chopped at each other-Pisander hacked the horn
of the horsehair-crested helmet right at its ridge,
lunging as Menelaus hacked Pisander between the eyes,
the bridge of the nose, and bone cracked, blood sprayed
and both eyes dropped at his feet to mix in the dust—
he curled and crashed. Digging a heel in his chest
Menelaus stripped his gear and vaunted out in glory,
"So home you'll run from our racing ships, by god,
all as corpses—see, you death-defying Trojans?
Never sated with shattering war cries, are you?
Nor do you lack the other brands of outrage,
all that shame you heaped on me, you rabid dogs!
No fear in your hearts for the quaking rage of Zeus,
the thundering god of host and welcome stranger—
one day he'll raze your lofty city for you.
You Trojans who stole away my wedded wife
and hoards of riches too—for no reason, none—
my queen of the realm who hosted you with kindness.
And now you rampage on among our deep-sea ships,
wild to torch our hulls and kill our heroes-well,
you'll be stopped, somewhere, mad as you are for combat!
Zeus, Father Zeus, they say you excel all others . . .
all men and gods, in wisdom clear and calm—
but all this brutal carnage comes from you.
Look how you favor them, these reckless Trojans,
their fury always in uproar—no one can ever slake
their thirst for blood, for the great leveler, war!
One can achieve his fill of all good things,
even of sleep, even of making love . . .
rapturous song and the beat and sway of dancing.
A man will yearn for his fill of all these joys
before his fill of war. But not these Trojans—
no one can glut their lust for battle!"
So he cried
and staunch Atrides stripped the gear from the corpse
and heaving the bloody bronze to eager comrades
swung to attack again, frontline assault.
There—
Harpalion charged Menelaus—King Pylaemenes' son
who'd followed his father into war at Troy
but he never reached his fatherland again.
He closed on Atrides, spear stabbing his. shield
right on the boss but the bronze could not drive through,
so back he drew to his ranks, dodging death, glancing
left and right, fearing a lance would graze his flesh.
But Meriones caught him in full retreat, he let fly
with a bronze-tipped arrow, hitting his right buttock
up under the pelvic bone so the lance pierced the bladder.
He sank on the spot, hunched in his dear companion's arms,
gasping out his life as he writhed along the ground
like an earthworm stretched out in death, blood pooling,
soaking the earth dark red. Hardy Paphlagonians,
working over him, hoisting him onto a chariot,
bore him back to the sacred walls of Troy.. .
deep in grief while his father, weeping freely,
walked beside them now. No blood-price came his way.
Not for his son who breathed his last in battle.

 

  But Paris flared in rage at his comrade's death,
his friend and guest among all the Paphlagonians.
Incensed, he let loose with a bronze-tipped arrow
aimed at one Euchenor, son of the prophet Polyidus,
a decent, wealthy man who made his home in Corinth.
Well Euchenor knew that boarding the ships for Troy
meant certain death: his father told him so . . .
Time and again the strong old prophet said
he'd die in his own halls of a fatal plague
or go with the ships and die at Trojan hands.
So off Euchenor sailed, both to save his wealth
from the heavy fine the Argives made deserters pay
and himself from wasting illness—no slow plague for him.
Suddenly Paris struck him under the jaw and ear—
and life flew from his limbs
and the hateful darkness had him in its grip.

 

  The rest fought on like a mass of whirling fire.
But Hector dear to Zeus had no idea, Hector
heard nothing of how his men, left of the ships,
were torn and mauled in the Argives' rough response.
The glory might even have gone to them at any moment,
so intent was the god who grips and shakes the earth
as he surged his Argives on and the god surged too,
adding his own immortal force in their defense.
But Hector kept on driving too just at the point
where he first broke through the gates and wall he charged,
he smashed the Achaean lines, dense with armed men,
there where Protesilaus' and giant Ajax' ships
lay hauled up in the breaking, churning surf
and the wall to landward dipped low to the ground,
the weakest point where the fiercest fighting raged—
waves of Trojans, Trojan horse in assault.
  Bulked against them,
Boeotian troops, Ionian troops with their long war-shirts,
Locrians, Phthians and men of Epea famed in battle
fought to stop this Hector hurtling at the ships.
Nothing they did could thrust him off their lines,
Prince Hector roaring on like a torch—not even
the picked Athenians led by Menestheus, Peteos' son
and backing him came Phidas, Stichius, brave Bias,
then the Epean units led by Meges, Phyleus' son,
Amphion, Dracius, and leading the Phthian ranks
came Medon flanking Podarces tough in skirmish.
Medon the bastard son of royal King Oileus,
Little Ajax' brother, but Medon lived in Phylace,
banished from native land—he'd killed a kinsman
dear to Oileus' wife, his stepmother Eriopis—
but Iphiclus son of Phylacus bore Podarces . . .
Brothers-in-arms, he and Medon led the Phthians,
out in the forefront of those gallant soldiers
fighting beside Boeotians now to save the ships.
But Oileus' son the racing Ajax—not for a moment,
not at all would he leave his giant brother Ajax,
shoulder-to-shoulder they fought together here:
close as a brace of wine-dark oxen matched in power,
dragging a bolted plow through packed fallow land
and the sweat rushes up at the roots of both their horns
and only the width of polished yoke keeps both beasts apart,
struggling up the furrow to cut the field's last strip.
So both men stood their ground, bracing man-to-man
and a flock of comrades, hardened combat veterans
followed the Great Ajax, ready to take his shield
whenever sweat and labor sapped his knees.
But no Locrians followed the hearty Little Ajax.
They had no love for stand-and-fight encounters—
had no crested bronze helmets to guard their heads,
no balanced shields in their grasp, no ashen spears,
only their bows and slings of springy, twisted wool.
Trusting these, they followed their chief to Troy,
shooting with these, salvo on pelting salvo,
they tore the Trojan battle lines to pieces.
So the men in heavy armor fought at the front,
they grappled Trojans and Hector helmed in bronze
while Locrians slung from the rear, safe, .out of range,
till the Trojan troops forgot their lust for blood
as showering arrows raked their ranks with panic.
Deadly going—
then and there the Trojans might have been rolled back,
far away from the ships and tents to wind-tom Troy
if Polydamas had not rushed to headstrong Hector:
"Impossible man! Won't you listen to reason?
Just because some god exalts you in battle
you think you can beat the rest at tactics too.
How can you hope to garner all the gifts at once?
One man is a splendid fighter—a god has made him so—
one's a dancer, another skilled at lyre and song,
and deep in the next man's chest farseeing Zeus
plants the gift of judgment, good clear sense.
And many reap the benefits of that treasure:
troops of men he saves, as he himself knows best.
So now I will tell you what seems best to me. Look,
the battle bums like a swirling crown around your head
but our valiant Trojans, once they scaled the wall—
some fall back from the front, idling in armor,
others soldier on, squads against mass formations,
scattering helter-skelter round the hulls.
Draw back now!
Call the best of our captains here, this safe ground.
Then we can all fall in and plan our tactics well:
whether we fling ourselves against the ships—
if Zeus would care to hand us victory now—
or beat retreat from the beach and cut our losses.
I fear they'll pay us back for yesterday's triumph.
He waits by the ships, a man never sated with battle . . .
I doubt he'll keep from the fighting any longer,
not with all his war-lust!"

 

  So he urged. His plan won Hector over—
less danger, more success—and down he leapt
from his chariot fully armed and hit the ground,
calling out to Polydamas brisk, winged orders:
"You stay here, hold back our captains here.
I'm on my way over there to meet this new assault—
I'll soon be back, once I've given them clear commands."

 

  And out like a flashing snowcapped peak he moved,
shouting, sweeping on through his ranks and Trojan allies.
Squads of others swarmed and rallied around Polydamas,
Panthous' friendly son—they'd heard Hector's orders.
But Hector ranged the front to find his leaders,
hunting Deiphobus and the rugged warlord Helenus,
Adamas, Asius' son, and Asius son of Hyrtacus.
Where could he find them now? Find them he did,
no longer free of wounds, unhurt—not at all . . .
Adamas, Asius, both sprawled at Achaea's stems,
dead at the Argives' hands. The others at home,
behind the walls, were gouged by shaft or sword.
But he quickly found one more, on the left flank
of the heart-wrenching carnage-royal Paris,
fair-haired Helen's consort was rousing comrades,
driving them back to battle. Once he gained his side
Hector raked his brother with insults, stinging taunts:
"Paris, appalling Paris! Our prince of beauty—
mad for women, you lure them all to ruin!
Where's Deiphobus? Helenus, rugged warlord?
Adamas, Asius' son, and Asius son of Hyrtacus—
where's Othryoneus, tell me.
Now all towering Troy is ruined top to bottom!
Now one thing's certain—your own headlong death!"

 

  And Paris, magnificent as a god, replied,
"Hector, bent on faulting a man without a fault?
At other times I might have shrunk from the fighting,
true, but not today. Mother bore me-even me—
not to be a coward through and through. Think,
since you fired our comrades' fury against the ships,
from that hour we've held our ground right here,
taking the Argives on, and nonstop, no rest.
Our comrades are dead, Hector,
those you inquire about with such concern . . .
Only Deiphobus and the rugged warlord Helenus
have made it back alive, wounded with sturdy spears,
both in the hand too, but Zeus beat off their deaths.
Now lead the way, wherever your fighting spirit bids you.
All of us right behind you, hearts intent on battle.
Nor do I think you'll find us short on courage,
long as our strength will last. Past his strength
no man can go, though he's set on mortal combat."
That brought his brother's warrior spirit round.
On they went where the thickest fighting broke,
churning round Cebriones, dauntless Polydamas,
Phalces, Orthaeus and veteran Polyphetes,
Palmys, Hippotion's two, sons-Ascanius, Morys—
fresh reserves just come from Ascania's fertile soil,
just last morning, but now great Zeus incited all-out war.
Down the Trojans came like a squall of brawling gale-winds
blasting down with the Father's thunder, loosed on earth
and a superhuman uproar bursts as they pound the heavy seas,
the giant breakers seething, battle lines of them roaring,
shoulders rearing, exploding foam, waves in the vanguard,
waves rolling in from the rear. So on the Trojans came,
waves in the vanguard, waves from the rear, closing,
bronze men glittering, following captains, closing
and Hector led the way, a match for murderous Ares—
Priam's son holding his balanced shield before him,
tough with oxhides, studded thick with bronze
and round his temples the flashing helmet shook.
He plowed forward, testing enemy lines at all points
to see if they'd crack before him-charging under his shield
but he could not overpower the Argives' stiff resolve
and Ajax hulking forward with big strides, the first
to challenge Hector: "Madman! Here, come closer—
trying to frighten Argives? Why waste your breath?
No, no, it's not that we lack the skill in battle,
it's just the brutal lash of Zeus that beats us down.
Your hopes soar, I suppose, to gut and crush our ships?
Well we have strong arms too, arms to defend those ships—
and long before that your city packed with people
will fall beneath our hands, plundered to rubble.
And you, I say, the day draws near when off you run
and pray to Father Zeus and the other deathless gods
to make your full-maned horses swifter than hawks—
whipping dust from the plain to sweep you back to Troy!"

 

  Clear on the right a bird winged past to seal those words,
a soaring eagle swooping. Spirits high with the sign,
the Argive armies cheered. But bent on glory
Hector answered the giant Ajax taunt for taunt:
"Enough of your blustering threats, you clumsy ox—
what loose talk, what rant!
I wish I were as surely the son of storming Zeus
for all my days—and noble Hera gave me birth
and I were prized as they prize Athena and Apollo—
as surely as this day will bring your Argives death,
down to the last man. And you will die with the rest.
If you have the daring to stand against my heavy spear
its point will rip your soft warm skin to shreds!
Then, then you'll glut the dogs and birds of Troy
with your fat and flesh—cut down by the beaked ships!"

 

 And loosing a savage yell, Hector led the way
and his captains followed close with unearthly cries
and Trojan ranks behind them crying shrill.
But facing them the Achaean ranks cried back,
not forgetting their courage, braced hard for assault
as the Trojans' bravest charged and roars from both armies
struck the high clear skies, the lightning world of Zeus.

But the mounting cries of war could not escape old Nestor,
pausing over his wine. He turned to Asclepius' son
with an urgent, winged word:
"Think, noble Machaon, what shall we do now?
The cries are fiercer-fighters beside the ships!
You sit here, keep drinking the shining wine now,
till well-kempt Hecamede draws you a warm bath,
steaming hot, and washes away that clotted blood.
But I am off to a lookout point to learn the truth."

 

  With that he seized the well-wrought shield of his son,
Thrasymedes breaker of horses—it lay in a comer,
all glowing bronze, while the boy used his father's.
Gripping a sturdy spear, bronze-edged and sharp,
he no sooner left his tent than stopped at once—
what a grim, degrading piece of work he saw.
Friends routed, enemies harrying friends in panic,
the Trojans riding high—the Argive wall in ruins.
Nestor stood there, stunned.
As a huge ground swell boils up on the open seas,
soundless, foreboding a hurricane's howling onslaught,
rearing but never rolling back or forth . . . all adrift
till one steady, decisive blast comes down from Zeus—
so the old man thrashed things out, tom two ways,
to join his Argives fast with chariot-teams
or go and find Agamemnon lord of armies.
His mind in turmoil, this way seemed the best:
he'd head for Atreus' son. But other soldiers
kept on flailing, cutting each other to pieces,
the tough bronze casing their bodies clanging out,
fighters stabbing with swords, flinging two-edged spears.

 

And now the royal kings fell in with Nestor.
Back they came, trailing along the shipways,
all who had taken wounds from the sharp bronze,
Diomedes, Odysseus, and Atreus' son Agamemnon.
Their ships were drawn up far away from the fighting,
moored in a group along the gray churning surf—
first ships ashore they'd hauled up on the plain
then built a defense to landward off their stems.
Not even the stretch of beach, broad as it was,
could offer berths to all that massed armada,
troops were crammed in a narrow strip of coast.
So they had hauled their vessels inland, row on row,
while the whole shoreline filled and the bay's gaping mouth
enclosed by the jaws of the two jutting headlands.
Now up they came for a better view of the battle,
a slow file of kings, leaning on their spears,
hearts in their chests weighed down with anguish—
and the sight of the old horseman coming toward them
struck them all with a sharper, sense of dread.
The king of men Agamemnon hailed him quickly:
"Nestor, son of Neleus, great pride of Achaea,
why turn your back on the lines where men are dying?
Why come back here to shore? I'm filled with fear
that breakneck Hector will bring his word to pass—
the threat he hurled against me once in a Trojan muster
that he would never leave our ships and return to Troy
till he'd torched our hulls and slaughtered all our men.
That was the prince's threat . . .
and now, look, by god, it all comes to pass!
How shameful—and now the rest of our men-at-arms
must harbor anger against me deep inside their hearts,
just like Achilles. And they have no stomach left
to fight to the end against the warships' stems."

 

  The noble old horseman could only bear him out:
"True, too true. A disaster's right upon us.
Not even thundering Zeus himself could turn the tide.
The rampart's down, there, the great wall we trusted,
our impregnable shield for the ships and men themselves.
The enemy storms down on the rolling hulls nonstop,
desperate, life or death. Hard as you scan the lines,
there's no more telling from which side we're harried—
carnage left and right. Death-cries hit the skies!
Put heads together—what shall we do now?—
if strategy's any use. Struggle's clearly not.
The last thing I'd urge is to throw ourselves into battle.
How on earth can a wounded man make war?"

 

  So the lord of men Agamemnon staged the action:
"Since they are fighting against the stems, old friend,
and the wall we built is useless, the trench a waste
where our Argive forces took such heavy losses .
always hoping against hope it was indestructible,
our impregnable shield for ships and men themselves—
so it must please the Father's overweening heart
to kill the Achaeans here, our memory blotted out
a world away from Argos! I knew it then,
even when Zeus defended us with all his might,
and I know it now, when he glorifies these Trojans—
He lifts them high as the blessed deathless gods
but ties our hands and lames our fighting spirit.
So come, follow my orders. All obey me now.
All vessels beached on the front along the shore—
haul them- down and row them out on the bright sea,
ride them over the anchor-stones in the offshore swell
till the bracing godsent night comes down and then,
if the Trojans will. refrain from war at night,
we haul down all the rest. No shame in running,
fleeing disaster, even in pitch darkness.
Better to flee from death than feel its grip."

 

  With a dark glance the shrewd tactician. Odysseus
wheeled on his commander: "What's this, Atrides,
this talk that slips from your clenched teeth?
You are the disaster.
Would to god you commanded another army,
a ragtag crew of cowards, instead of ruling us,
the men whom Zeus decrees, from youth to old age,
must wind down our brutal wars to the bitter end
until we drop and die, down to the last man.
So this is how you'd bid farewell to Troy,
yearning to kiss her broad streets good-bye—
Troy that cost our comrades so much grief?

 

Quiet!
What if one of the men gets wind of your brave plan?
No one should ever let such nonsense pass his lips,
no one with any skill in fit and proper speech—
and least of all yourself, a sceptered king.
Full battalions hang on your words, Agamemnon—
look at the countless loyal fighters you command!
Now where's your sense? You fill me with contempt—
what are you saying? With the forces poised to clash
you tell us to haul our oar-swept vessels out to sea?
Just so one more glory can crown these Trojans—
god help us, they have beaten us already—
and the scales of headlong death can drag us down.
Achaean troops will never hold the line, I tell you,
not while the long ships are being hauled to sea.
They'll look left and right-where can they run?—
and fling their lust for battle to the winds. Then,
commander of armies, your plan will kill us all!"

 

  At that the king of men Agamemnon backed down:
"A painful charge, Odysseus, straight to the heart.
I am hardly the man to order men, against their will,
to haul the oar-swept vessels out to sea. So now,
whoever can find a better plan, let him speak up,
young soldier or old. I would be pleased to hear him."

 

  And Diomedes lord of the war cry stepped forward,
"Here is your man. Right here, not far to seek.
If you'll only hear me out and take my lead,
not glare at me in resentment, each of you,
since I am the youngest-born in all our ranks.
I too have a noble birth to boast-my father,
Tydeus, mounded over now by the earth of Thebes.
Three brave sons were bom of the loins of Portheus:
they made their homes in Pleuron and craggy Calydon,
Agrius first, then Melas, the horseman Oeneus third,
my father's father, the bravest of them all.
There Oeneus stayed, on his own native soil,
but father wandered far, driven to live in Argos . . .
by the will of Zeus, I suppose, and other deathless gods.
He married one of Adrastus' daughters, settled down
in a fine wealthy house, with plenty of grainland
ringed with row on row of blooming orchards
and pastures full of sheep, his own herds.
And he excelled all Argives with his spear—
you must have heard the story, know it's true.
So you cannot challenge my birth as low, cowardly,
or spurn the advice I give, if the plan is really sound.
I say go back to the fighting, wounded as we are—
we must, we have no choice. But once at the front,
hold off from the spear-play, out of range ourselves
since who of us wants to double wounds on wounds?
But we can spur the rest of them into battle,
all who had nursed some private grudge before,
kept to the rear and shunned the grueling forays."

 

  The others listened closely and fell in line,
moving out, and marshal Agamemnon led them on.

 

  But the famous god of earthquakes was not blind.
No, Poseidon kept his watch and down he came
to the file of kings like an old veteran now,
he tugged at the right hand of Atreus' son
and sent his message flying: "Agamemnon—
now, by heaven, Achilles' murderous spirit
must be leaping in his chest, filled with joy
to behold his comrades slain and routed in their blood.
That man has got no heart in him, not a pulsebeat.
So let him die, outright—let a god wipe him out!
But with you the blessed gods are not enraged,
not through and through, Agamemnon . . .
A day will come when the Trojan lords and captains
send an immense dust storm swirling down the plain—
with your own eyes you'll see them break for Troy,
leaving -your ships and shelters free and clear!"

 

  A shattering cry, and he surged across the plain,
thundering loud as nine, ten thousand combat soldiers
shriek with Ares' fury when massive armies clash-so huge
that voice the god of the earthquake let loose from his lungs,
planting enormous martial power in each Achaean's heart
to urge the battle on, to fight and never flinch.

 

  Now Hera poised on her golden throne looked down,
stationed high at her post aloft Olympus' peak.
At once she saw the sea lord blustering strong
in the war where men win glory, her own brother
and husband's brother too, and her heart raced with joy.
But then she saw great Zeus at rest on the ridge
and the craggy heights of Ida gushing cold springs
and her heart filled with loathing. What could she do?—
Queen Hera wondered, her eyes glowing wide . . .
how could she outmaneuver Zeus the mastermind,
this Zeus with his battle-shield of storm and thunder?
At last one strategy struck her mind as best:
she would dress in all her glory and go to Ida—
perhaps the old desire would overwhelm the king
to lie by her naked body and make immortal love
and she might drift an oblivious, soft warm sleep
across his eyes and numb that seething brain.
So off she went to her room,
the chamber her loving son Hephaestus built her,
hanging the doors from doorposts snug and tight,
locked with a secret bolt no other god could draw.
She slipped in, closing the polished doors behind her.
The ambrosia first..Hera cleansed her enticing body
of any blemish, then she applied a deep olive rub,
the breath-taking, redolent oil she kept beside her . . .
one stir of the scent in the bronze-floored halls of Zeus
and a perfumed cloud would drift from heaven down to earth.
Kneading her skin with this to a soft glow and combing her hair,
she twisted her braids with expert hands, and sleek, luxurious,
shining down from her deathless head they fell, cascading.
Then round her shoulders she swirled the wondrous robes
that Athena wove her, brushed out to a high gloss
and worked into the weft an elegant rose brocade.
She pinned them across her breasts with a golden brooch
then sashed her waist with a waistband
floating a hundred tassels, and into her earlobes,
neatly pierced, she quickly looped her earrings,
ripe mulberry-clusters dangling in triple drops
and the silver glints they cast could catch the heart.
Then back over her brow she draped her headdress,
fine fresh veils for Hera the queen of gods,
their pale, glimmering sheen like a rising sun,
and under her smooth feet she fastened supple sandals.
Now, dazzling in all her rich regalia, head to foot,
out of her rooms she strode and beckoned Aphrodite
away from the other gods and whispered, "Dear child,
would you do me a favor . . . whatever I might ask?
Or would you refuse me, always fuming against me
because I defend the Argives, you the Trojans?"

 

  Aphrodite the daughter of Zeus replied at once,
"Hera, queen of the skies, daughter of mighty Cronus,
tell me what's on your mind. I am eager to do it—
whatever I can do . . . whatever can be done."

 

  Quick with treachery noble Hera answered,
"Give me Love, give me Longing now, the powers
you use to overwhelm all gods and mortal men!
I am off to the ends of the fruitful, teeming earth
to visit Ocean, fountainhead of the gods, and Mother Tethys
who nourished me in their halls and reared me well.
They received me from Rhea, when thundering Zeus
drove Cronus under the earth and the barren salt sea.
I go to visit them and dissolve their endless feud—
how long they have held back from each other now,
from making love, since anger struck their hearts.
But if words of mine could lure them back to love,
back to bed, to lock in each other's arms once more . . .
they would call me their honored, loving friend forever."

 

  Aphrodite, smiling her everlasting smile, replied,
"Impossible—worse, it's wrong to deny your warm request,
since you are the one who lies in the arms of mighty Zeus."

 

  With that she loosed from her breasts the breastband,
pierced and alluring, with every kind of enchantment
woven through it . . . There is the heat of Love,
the pulsing rush of Longing, the lover's whisper,
irresistible—magic to make the sanest man go mad.
And thrusting it into Hera's outstretched hands
she breathed her name in a throbbing, rising voice:
"Here now, take this band, put it between your breasts—
ravishing openwork, and the world lies in its weaving!
You won't return, I know, your mission unfulfilled,
whatever your eager heart desires to do."

 

  Hera broke into smiles now, her eyes wide—
with a smile she tucked the band between her breasts.

 

And Aphrodite the daughter of Zeus went home
but Hera sped in a flash from Mount Olympus' peak
and crossing Pieria's coast and lovely Emathia
rushed on, over the Thracian riders' snowy ridges,
sweeping the highest summits, feet never touching the earth
and east of Athos skimmed the billowing, foaming sea
and touched down on Lemnos, imperial Thoas' city.
There she fell in with Sleep, twin brother of Death,
clung to his hand and urged him, called his name:
"Sleep, master of all gods and all mortal men,
if you ever listened to me in the old days,
do what I ask you now—
and you shall have my everlasting thanks.
Put Zeus to sleep for me! Seal his shining eyes
as soon as I've gone to bed with, him, locked in love,
and I will give you gifts-a magnificent throne,
never tarnished, always glittering, solid gold.
My own son Hephaestus, the burly crippled Smith
will forge it finely and under it slide a stool
where you can prop your glistening feet and rest,
stretching out at feasts."
And the voice of Sleep
the soft and soothing drifted back . . . "Hera, Hera,
queen of the gods and daughter of mighty Cronus—
any other immortal god who lives forever,
believe me, I would put to sleep in a wink,
even the rolling tides of the great Ocean River,
the fountainhead that brought them all to birth.
But Zeus? Not I—I would not get too close
to the son of Cronus, much less put him under,
not unless the Father gave the command himself.
A commission of yours taught me my lesson once,
the day that Heracles, the insolent son of Zeus
sailed out from Troy, having razed her to the ground.
And then I put the brain of thundering Zeus to sleep,
pouring myself in a soft, soothing slumber round him.
But you and your anger! You were bent on.trouble,
whipping a howling killer-squall across the sea,
bearing Heracles off to the crowded town of Cos,
far from all his friends. But Zeus woke up,
furious, flinging immortal gods about his house
to hunt for me—I was the culprit, the worst of all—
and out of the skies he would have sunk me in the sea,
wiped me from sight, if the Night had failed to save me,
old Night that can overpower all gods and mortal men.
I reached her in flight and Father called it quits
despite his towering anger. True, Zeus shrank
from doing a thing to outrage rushing Night.
But now you are back, Hera—
you ask me to do the impossible once again."

 

  Eyes widening, noble Hera coaxed him further:
"So troubled, Sleep, why torture yourself with that?
You think that thundering Zeus, shielding the men of Troy,
will rage as he raged for great Heracles, his own son?
Come now, I will give you one of the younger Graces—
Wed her at once and she'll be called your wife."

 

  "On with it!"—Sleep cried, thrilled by the offer—
"Swear to me by the incorruptible tides of Styx,
one hand grasping the earth that feeds mankind,
the other the bright sea, that all may be our witness,
all gods under earth that gather round King Cronus!
Swear you will give me one of the younger Graces,
Pasithea, she's the one—
all my days I've tossed and turned for her!"
 


The white-armed goddess Hera complied at once.
She swore as he urged and sounded out the names
of all the gods in the Tartarean Pit we call the Titans.
As soon as she'd sworn and sealed her binding oath,
away they launched from Imbros' walls and Lemnos,
swathed in a thick mist and nimbly made their way
until they reached Mount Ida with all her springs,
the mother of wild beasts, and making Lectos headland,
left the sea for the first time and swept over dry land
as the treetops swayed and shook beneath their feet.
There Sleep came to a halt—
before the eyes of the Father could detect him—
and climbed up softly into a towering pine tree.
The tallest trunk there was on the heights of Ida,
it pierced the low-hung mist and shot up through the sky.
There he nestled,, hidden deep in the needling boughs,
for all the world like the bird with a shrill cry,
the mountain bird the immortals call Bronze Throat
and mortals call the Nighthawk.
But not Hera—
quick on her feet she scaled Gargaron peak,
the highest crest of Ida. And Zeus spotted her now,
Zeus who gathers the breasting clouds. And at one glance
the lust came swirling over him, making his heart race,
fast as the first time—all unknown to their parents—
they rolled in bed, they locked and surged in love.
He rose before her now, he savored her name:
"Hera—where are you rushing?
What wild desire brings you here from Olympus?
Where are the team and car you always ride?"

 

  And filled with guile the noble Hera answered,
"I am off to the ends of the fruitful, teeming earth
to visit Ocean, fountainhead of the gods, and Mother Tethys
who nourished me in their halls and reared me well . . .
I go to visit them and dissolve their endless feud—
how long they have held back from each other now,
from making love, since anger struck their hearts.
My team stands at the foot of Ida with all her springs,
they wait to bear me over the good dry land and sea.
But now it is you, you I have come to visit, Zeus—
speeding here from the heights of Mount Olympus,
afraid you'll flare in anger against me later
if I should go in secret toward the halls
of the deep, flowing Ocean."
  "Why hurry, Hera?"—
Zeus who gathers the breasting clouds replied,
"that is a journey you can make tomorrow. Now—
come, let's go to bed, let's lose ourselves in love!
Never has such a lust for goddess or mortal woman
flooded my pounding heart and overwhelmed me so.
Not even then, when I made love to Ixion's wife
who bore me Pirithous, rival to all the gods in wisdom . . .
not when I loved Acrisius' daughter Danae—marvelous ankles—
and Perseus sprang to life and excelled all men alive . . .
not when I stormed Europa, far-famed Phoenix' daughter
who bore me Minos and Rhadamanthys grand as gods . . .
not even Semele, not even Alcmena queen of Thebes
who bore me a son, that lionheart, that Heracles,
and Semele bore Dionysus, ecstasy, joy to mankind—
not when I loved Demeter, queen of the lustrous braids—
not when I bedded Leto ripe for glory—
Not even you!
That was nothing to how I hunger for you now—
irresistible longing lays me low!"

 

  Teeming with treachery noble Hera led him on:
"Dread majesty, son of Cronus, what are you saying?
You are eager for bed now, burning to make love,
here on Ida's heights for all the world to see?
What if one of the deathless gods observes us,
sleeping together, yes—
and runs off to the rest and points us out to all?
I have no desire to rise from a bed like that
and steal back home to your own high halls—
think of the shocking scandal there would be!
But if you're on fire, overflowing with passion,
there's always your own bedroom. Hephaestus built it,
your own dear son, and the doors fit snug and tight . . .
There we can go to bed at once—since love is now your pleasure!"

 

  And Zeus who gathers the breasting clouds assured her,
"Hera—nothing to fear, no god or man will see us—
I will wrap us round in a golden cloud so dense
not even the Sun's rays, the sharpest eyes in the world,
will pierce the mist and glimpse us making love!"

 

  With that the son of Cronus caught his wife in his arms
and under them now the holy earth burst with fresh green grass,
crocus and hyacinth, clover soaked with dew, so thick and soft
it lifted their bodies off the hard, packed ground . . .
Folded deep in that bed they lay and round them wrapped
a marvelous cloud of gold, and glistening showers of dew
rained down around them both.
And, so, deep in peace,
the Father slept on Gargaron peak, conquered by Sleep
and strong assaults of Love, his wife locked in his arms.
Soothing Sleep went rushing off to the ships at once,
running a message to Poseidon. Approaching the god
who shakes the earth, Sleep sent a winged urging:
"Fight for the Argives now with all your might!
Now give them glory, if only a moment's glory—
long as Zeus still slumbers. I've covered him over,
sent him into a deep, soothing sleep as soon as Hera
seduced great Zeus to lose himself in love."
With that
Sleep went drifting off to the famous tribes of men,
stirring Poseidon even more to defend the Argives.
He suddenly sprang forward, into the front ranks,
the god's voice rippling strong: "Again, you Argives?
You're handing victory over to Hector, Priam's son,
so he can seize the ships and reap the glory?
That's his hope, his prayer, thanks to Achilles,
ironbound by the ships and filled with anger still.
But Achilles won't be missed so sorely, not a bit,
if the rest of us can rouse and defend each other.
So come, follow my orders. All obey me now.
Gear up with the best and biggest shields in camp
and encase our heads in helmets, burnished, fire-bright
and take in hand the longest javelins we can find—
then in for attack! And I, I will lead the way
and the son of Priam won't stand up against us,
not for long, I tell you, not for all his fury.
Let any rugged fighter who shoulders a small buckler
pass it on to a weaker man—put on the bigger shield.
 


  The men hung on his words and they obeyed at once.
And the kings themselves, overcoming their wounds,
arrayed them all in proper battle-order.
Diomedes, Odysseus, Atreus' son Agamemnon
ranged the ranks, made them exchange their armor.
The best men donned the best, the worst the worst
and soon as they strapped the bronze around their bodies,
out they moved and the god of earthquakes led them on,
grasping his terrible long sword in his massive hand,
the grip of power, the blade like a lightning flash.
There is no way in the world a man can meet its edge
and still survive the slashing—fear holds all men back.
 


But over against them glorious Hector ranged his Trojans . . .
and now they stretched the line of battle strangling tight,
the blue-haired god of the sea and Hector fired in arms,
he driving the Trojans, the god driving the Argives—
and a wild surf pounded the ships and shelters,
squadrons clashed with shattering war cries rising.
Not so loud the breakers bellowing out against the shore,
driven in from open sea by the North Wind's brutal blast,
not so loud the roar of fire whipped to a crackling blaze
rampaging into a mountain gorge, raging up through timber,
not so loud the gale that howls in the leafy crowns of oaks
when it hits its pitch of fury tearing branches down—
Nothing so loud as cries of Trojans, cries of Achaeans,
terrible war cries, armies storming against each other.
And shining Hector was first to hurl his spear—
at the giant Ajax veering into him, full face—
a direct hit! where two straps crossed his chest,
one for the shield, one for the silver-studded sword
but both flexed taut to guard his glistening skin.
Hector seethed in anger—his hurtling spear
and his whole arm's power poured in a wasted shot
and back in his massing ranks he shrank, dodging death.
But as Hector backed away Great Ajax seized a rock—
countless holding-stones for the fast trim ships
were rolling round among the fighters' feet—
he hoisted one and heaved it at Hector's chest
and struck him over the shield-rim, close to his throat
and the blow sent Hector whirling off like a whipping-top,
reeling round and round. As a huge oak goes down
at a stroke from Father Zeus, ripped up by the roots
and a grim reek of sulphur bursts forth from the trunk
and a passerby too close, looking on, loses courage—
the bolt of mighty Zeus is hell on earth—so in a flash,
for all his fighting power, Hector plunged in the dust,
his spear dropped from his fist, shield and helmet '
crushing in on him, bronze gear clashing round him.
And shouting squads of Achaeans raced in for the kill,
hoping to drag him off and hurling showers of spears
but none could stab or strike the lord of armies now.
Too fast for them, here was a ring of Trojan chiefs:
Aeneas, Polydamas and the royal prince Agenor,
Sarpedon the Lycians' captain, valiant Glaucus=
and all their troops spared nothing, pitching in,
bracing their thick bulging shields to cover Hector.
Comrades heaved him up and swept him clear of the fighting,
far downfield till they gained his team of racers
standing behind the rear lines and rush of battle,
their driver and blazoned chariot held in tow . . .
Then back to Troy they bore him, groaning hard.

 

  But once they reached the ford where the river runs clear,
the strong, whirling Xanthus sprung of immortal Zeus,
they lifted him off his car and laid him down
on the level bank, splashing water over him.
Hector caught his breath and his eyes cleared,
he crouched down on his knees to vomit dark clots
then slumped back down, stretched on the ground again
and the world went black as night across his eyes.
The force of the blow still overwhelmed his senses.

 

  But Argive units, spotting Hector in full retreat,
charged the Trojans harder, their lust for battle rising.
And first by far was Oileus' son, quick Little Ajax—
he lunged out and his spearhead skewered Satnius,
Enops' son the lithe nymph of the ford once bore
to Enops tending his flocks by Satniois' banks . . .
Now the renowned spearman Ajax rushed against him,
slashing him down the flank, knocking him backward—
Trojans and Argives swarming over him, out for blood.
Shaking a spear Polydamas moved in fast to the rescue,
Panthous' son lancing the right shoulder of Prothoenor,
Arielycus' son, and the heavy shaft impaled his upper arm—
he pitched in the dust, clawing the earth with both hands
and Polydamas shouted over him, wild with glory now:
"Here is another spear that leaps from my strong arm,
from Panthous' brave son, and hits its mark, by god!
It's found its home in an Argive's waiting flesh—
a crutch in his grip, I'd say,
as he trudges down now to the House of Death!"

 

The Argives rose in horror to hear that boast,
veteran Ajax most of all, the anger leapt inside him—
Prothoenor had dropped at the feet of Telamon's son.
Ajax suddenly spun a glinting spear at Polydamas,
fast, but the Trojan dodged black fate himself
with a quick spring to the side—
but Antenor's son Archelochus caught the shaft
for the gods had doomed that fighting man to death.
Ajax struck him right where the head and neckbone join,
the last link in the spine, he cut both tendons through
so the mouth and brow and nostrils hit the ground
before the shins and knees as the man dropped dead.
And now it was Ajax' turn to shout at brave Polydamas,
 


"Think it over, Polydamas, tell the truth, my friend—
a decent bargain, no? This man's body for Prothoenor'sl
No coward, to judge by his looks, no coward's stock,
no doubt some brother of stallion-breaking Antenor,
that or his own son—the blood-likeness is striking!"

 

  So Ajax vaunted, knowing his victim full well,
and a raw revulsion seized the Trojans' hearts.
Straddling his brother, Acamas thrust and speared
Boeotian Promachus, trying to drag the corpse by the feet,
and Acamas loosed his cry of exultation, "Argives—
glorious braggarts, you, insatiate with your threats!
Don't think struggle and pain will be ours alone—
your day will come to die in blood like him.
Think how Promachus sleeps at your feet now,
beaten down by my spear—with no long wait
to pay the price for my brother dead and gone.
That's why a fighter prays for kin in his halls,
blood kin to survive and avenge his death in battle!"

 

  But the Argives rose in grief to avenge that boast
skilled Peneleos most of all, anger blazed inside him.
He charged Acamas—Acamas could not stand the attack,
he ran—and Peneleos stabbed at Ilioneus instead,
a son of the herdsman Phorbas rich in flocks,
Hermes' favorite Trojan: Hermes gave him wealth
but Ilioneus' mother gave him just one son . . .
the one Peneleos lanced beneath the brows,
down to the eyes' roots and scooped an eyeball out—
the spear cut clean through the socket, out behind the nape
and backward down he sat, both hands stretched wide
as Peneleos, quickly drawing his whetted sword,
hacked him square in the neck and lopped his head
and down on the ground it tumbled, helmet and all.
But the big spear's point still stuck in the eye socket—
hoisting the head high like a poppy-head on the shaft
he flourished it in the eyes of all the Trojans now,
yelling out his boast: "Go tell them from me,
you Trojans, tell the loving father and mother
of lofty Ilioneus to start the dirges in the halls!
The wife of Promachus, Alegenor's son, will never thrill
to her dear husband striding home from the wars
that day the sons of Achaea sail from Troy!"

 

  And the knees of every Trojan shook with fear,
each veteran frantic, glancing left and fight—
how to escape his sudden, plunging death?
 


  Sing to me now, you Muses who hold the halls of Olympus,
who was the first Achaean to drag off bloody spoils
as the famous god of earthquakes turned the tide?
Telamonian Ajax first, Ajax brought down Hyrtius,
Gyrtius' son, a lord of the ironhearted Mysians.
Next Antilochus slaughtered Phalces, Mermerus—
Meriones killed off Morys, killed Hippotion,
Teucer cut down Periphetes and Prothoon.
Menelaus took the hardened captain Hyperenor,
gouged his flank and the bronze ripped him open,
spurting his entrails out—and his life, gushing forth
through the raw, yawning wound, went pulsing fast
and the dark came swirling down across his eyes.
But Oileus' son, quick Ajax killed the most—
no one alive could run men down in flight like him
once Zeus whipped enemy ranks in blinding, panic rout.

Back through jutting stakes and across the trench they fled,
and hordes were cut down at the Argives' hands-the rest,
only after they reached the chariots, stood fast,
blanched with fear, whipped in desperate flight.
That moment Zeus awoke on the heights of Ida,
stretched out by Hera, queen of the golden throne—
he leapt to his feet, he saw the Trojans and Achaeans,
one side routed, the other harrying them in panic,
Achaeans attacking, and god Poseidon led the way.
And Zeus saw Hector sprawled on the battlefield,
his comrades kneeling round him as he panted,
struggling hard for breath, his senses stunned,
vomiting blood . . . The man who'd struck him dowr
was not the weakest Argive. At the sight of Hector
the father of men and gods filled with pity now
and shooting a terrible dark glance down at Hera,
burst out at her, "What a disaster you create!
Uncontrollable Hera—you and your treachery—
halting Hector's assault and routing Hector's armies.
I wouldn't be surprised, my Queen, if you were the first
to reap the pernicious whirlwind you have sown—
I'll whip you stroke on stroke.
Don't you recall the time I strung you in mid-air
and slung those two massive anvils down from your feet
and lashed both hands with a golden chain you could not break?
There, there in the clouds and high clear sky you dangled.
And the mighty gods on steep Olympus raged away,
impotent—what could they do to set you free?
Standing there, helpless. And any god I caught
I'd seize and send him plunging over the ramparts,
headfirst till he hit the earth, barely alive.
Not even then would the stark grief for Heracles
release my breaking heart—my own godlike son . . .
You with the North Wind's help had coaxed the gales
to send him scudding over the barren salt sea—
you, always plotting miseries for my son,
you bore him off to the crowded town of Cos.
But there I saved him, whisked him away to safety,
back to the stallion-land of Argos, worn with torment.
I will help you remember—you'll give up your treacheries,
you will see if your warm embraces serve you then,
your bed of lust where you sank me in your arms.
Down from the gods you came to waylay me—
you seduced me blind."
Her eyes wide,
Queen Hera shuddered before his thunder,
protesting, swearing a flight of winged oaths:
"Earth be my witness now, the vaulting Sky above
and the dark cascading waters of the Styx—I swear
by the greatest, grimmest oath that binds the happy gods!
By your sacred head, by the bed of our own marriage
that I, at least, would never take in vain . . .
Never by will of mine did the god of earthquakes
wreak havoc among the Trojan ranks and Hector
and surge to help their foes!I
It must be his own great rage that drives him on—
he pitied the sight of Argives pinned against their ships.
Not I . . . why, I'd be the first to counsel him
to take your lead, Zeus, wherever you command,
my king of the black cloud!"
A rousing appeal,
and the father of men and gods looked down and smiled
and took command with a flight of winging orders:
"Excellent, Hera. Now, if in the years to come
you will accord with me, my wide-eyed Queen,
throned with me in the gods' decisive sessions,
then Poseidon, bent as he is to go his own way,
must change at once and wrench his will to ours,
to yours and mine united.
So then, Hera,
if you mean what you say, down to the last word,
go back now to the deathless tribes of gods
and summon Iris to come before my presence,
summon Apollo too, lord of the famous bow.
Iris will fly to Achaea's bronze-armed troops
and direct the god who shakes the earth to stop,
to quit the war and return to his own ocean halls.
And let Apollo drive Prince Hector back to battle,
breathe power back in his lungs, make him forget
the pains that rack his heart. Let him whip the Achaeans
in headlong panic rout and roll them back once more,
tumbling back on the oar-swept ships of Peleus' son Achilles.
And he, he will launch his comrade Patroclus into action
and glorious Hector will cut him down with a spear
in front of Troy, once Patroclus has slaughtered
whole battalions of strong young fighting men
and among them all, my shining son Sarpedon.
But then—enraged for Patroclus—
brilliant Achilles will bring Prince Hector down.
And then, from that day on, I'll turn the tide of war:
back the fighting goes, no stopping it, ever, all the way
till Achaean armies seize the beetling heights of Troy
through Athena's grand design.
But till that hour
I will never cease my anger. Nor will I permit
a single immortal god to save the Argive forces,
not till Achilles' prayer has been fulfilled.
So I vowed at first. I bowed my head in assent
that day the goddess Thetis clutched my knees,
begging me to exalt Achilles scourge of cities."

 

  And the white-armed goddess Hera obeyed at once—
clearing Ida's peaks she soared for sheer Olympus.
Quick as a thought goes flashing through a man
who's traveled the world—"Ah to be there, or there!"—
as his mind swarms with journeys, fresh desires—
so quick in her eager flight flew noble Hera now
and scaling steep Olympus went among the gods,
the immortal powers thronging Zeus's halls.
They all sprang to their feet at sight of Hera,
lifting cups to greet her, crowding round the queen.
But she passed the rest and took a cup from Themis,
flushed with beauty, who ran to meet her first
and hailed her now with winged words of welcome:
"Hera, what brings you back? You look so harried.
Oh I know it, the son of Cronus has terrified you—
your everlasting husband!"
 "Please, Themis,"
the white-armed goddess Hera answered firmly,
"don't ask me to go through that ordeal again.
You know his rage yourself. So rigid, unrelenting.
But you keep on presiding over the gods, Themis,
the feasting in the halls. You'll hear it all,
and with you all the immortals—
what a chain of disasters Zeus brings to light!
Nothing to lift all spirits alike, I warn you . . .
not among men, not among gods, if one's still left
who warms to feasts, his heart at peace, these days."

 

  With those bleak words Queen Hera took her seat.
The gods looked grim throughout the halls of Zeus:
She smiled with her lips only,
her forehead furrowed over her dark brows
as her anguish rose and she addressed them all:
"What fools we are, storming against Zeus—we're mad!
And still we engage him, trying to block his way
with a word or show of force. But there he sits,
off and away—with never a care or qualm for us—
claiming that he among the deathless gods on high
is first in strength and power, none in the world his rival.
So each of you here must take what blows he sends.
Why, Ares, I gather, has just received his share . . .
his son is dead in battle, his dearest son, Ascalaphus—
doesn't invincible Ares claim to be his father?"

 

  Fighting words, and Ares pounded his sturdy thighs
with the flats of both hands and let loose in grief:
"Now, you gods of Olympus—who could blame me now
if I descend on Achaea's ships to avenge my son,
my butchered son? Even if fate will crush me,
striking me down with the thunderbolt of Zeus—
sprawled in the blood and dust with dead men's corpses!"

 

With that he called his henchmen Rout and Terror
to yoke his team as the god strapped on his shining gear.
And now some greater disaster might have come from Zeus,
some wrath, some harsher rage to break the gods on high—
if Pallas Athena, fearing the worst for all immortals,
had not leapt from her throne, bolted through the gates,
torn the helmet off his head, the shield from his back
and snatching the brazen spear from his burly grip,
propped it against a pillar
and dressed the War-god down in all his fury:
"Maniac, out of your senses! You, you're ruinedl
What are your ears for, Ares, can't you hear the truth?
Your wits are gone—where's your respect for others?
Can't you grasp what the white-armed goddess tells us?—
and she's just returned from Olympian Zeus, just now.
What's your pleasure? To fill your own cup of pain
then slink back to Olympus, whipped and fuming-forced?
You're planting the seeds of endless trouble for us all!
He will leave those men in a flash, Achaeans, Trojans,
overweening Trojans, and back great Zeus will come
to batter us on Olympus, seize one after another—
gods guilty and innocent routed all together.
So now, I tell you, drop this anger for your son.
By now some fighter better than he, a stronger hand
has gone down in his own blood, or soon will go.
It is no small labor to rescue all mankind,
every mother's son."
 With that sharp warning
Athena seated headlong Ares on his throne.
But Queen Hera summoned Apollo from the halls
and Iris too, the messenger of the immortals,
and gave them both their winged marching orders:
"Zeus directs you to Ida with all good speed!
But once you arrive and meet great Zeus's glance,
do whatever the Father drives you on to do."

 

And with that command Queen Hera strode home
and regained her throne. But the two launched out in flight
and reaching Ida with all her springs, mother of flocks,
they found the thundering son of Cronus seated high
on Gargaron peak, crowned with a fragrant cloud.
Coming before the lord of storm and lightning
the two just stood there, waiting . . .
Nor was his heart displeased to see them both—
how fast they'd obeyed his loving wife's commands—
and first he issued Iris winging orders: "Away, Iris!
Quick as you can to the grand sea lord Poseidon.
Go, give him my message, start to finish—
and see that every word of it rings exactly so.
Command Poseidon to quit the war and slaughter now,
go back to the tribes of gods or down to his bright sea.
But if he will not obey my orders, if he spurns them,
let him beware, heart and soul—for all his power
he can never muster the will to stand my onslaught.
I claim I am far greater than he in striking force,
I am the first-born too. Yet the spirit inside him
never shrinks from claiming to be my equal, never,
though other gods will cringe from me in terror."

 

  And Iris riding the wind obeyed his orders,
swooping down from Ida's peaks to sacred Troy.
Like the snow or freezing hail that pelts from clouds
when the North Wind born in the clear heaven blasts it on—
so in an eager rush of speed the wind-swift Iris flew
and stopped beside the famous god of earthquakes,
calling out to him, "Here is a message for you,
god of the sea-blue mane who grips the earth.
I speed this word to you from storming Zeus.
He commands you to quit the war and slaughter now,
go back to the tribes of gods or down to your bright sea!
But if you will not obey his orders, if you spurn them,
he threatens to come here in person, fight you down,
power against power. Avoid his grasp, he warns.
He claims he is far greater than you in striking force,
he is the first-born too! Yet the spirit inside you
never shrinks from claiming to be his equal, never—
though other gods will cringe from him in terror."

 

  But the glorious god of earthquakes shook in anger:
"What outrage! Great as he is, what overweening arrogance!
So, force me, will he, to wrench my will to his?
I with the same high honors?
Three brothers we are, all sprung from Cronus,
all of us brought to birth by Rhea—Zeus and I,
Hades the third, lord of the dead beneath the earth.
The world was split three ways. Each received his realm.
When we shook the lots I drew the sea, my foaming eternal home,
and Hades drew the land of the dead engulfed in haze and night
and Zeus drew the heavens, the clouds and the high clear sky,
but the earth and Olympus heights are common to us all.
So I will never live at the beck and call of Zeus!
No, at his royal ease, and powerful as he is,
let him rest content with his third of the world.
Don't let him try to frighten me with his mighty hands—
what does he take me for, some coward out-and-out?
He'd better aim his terrible salvos at his own,
all his sons and daughters. He's their father—
they have to obey his orders. It's their fate."

 

  Iris quick as the breezes tried to soothe him:
"Wait, god of the sea-blue mane who grips the earth—
you really want me to take that harsh, unbending answer
back to Zeus? No change of heart, not even a little?
The hearts of the great, you know, can always change . . .
you know how the Furies always stand by older brothers."

 

  The lord of the earthquake yielded ground in answer:
"True, Iris, immortal friend, how right you are—
it's a fine thing when a messenger knows what's proper.
Ah but how it galls me, it wounds me to the quick
when the Father tries to revile me with brute abuse,
his equal in rank, our fated shares of the world the samel
Still, this time I will yield, for all my outrage . . .
but I tell you this, and there's anger in my threat:
if ever—against my will and Athena queen of armies,
Hera and Hermes, and the god of fire Hephaestus—
if Zeus ever spares the towering heights of Troy,
if he ever refuses to take her walls by force
and give the Argive troops resounding triumph,
let Zeus know this full well—
the breach between us both will never heal!"
A sharp tremor
and the massive god of earthquakes left Achaea's lines,
into the surf he dove and heroes missed him sorely.
That very instant storming Zeus dispatched Apollo:
"Go, my friend, to the side of Hector armed in bronze.
The god of the quakes who grips and pounds the earth
has just this moment plunged in his own bright sea,
diving away from all my mounting anger. Just think
what the gods would have heard if we had come to blows,
even those beneath the ground who circle Cronus.
Better for me this way, Poseidon too, to yield
before my mighty hands—outraged as he is:
not without sweat would we have called it quits.
But now take up in your hands my storm-cloud shield,
its dark tassels flying, shake it over the Argives,
stampede their heroes in panic, Archer of the Sky.
But make this glorious Hector your main concern,
rouse his breakneck courage till, racing in terror,
the Argives reach the fleet and the Hellespont in rout.
From that point on I plan my tactics, give commands
to grant the Argives breathing room in battle."

 

  Apollo did not neglect the Father's orders.
Down from Ida's peaks he swooped like a hawk,
the killer of doves, the fastest thing on wings.
He found Prince Hector, the son of wise King Priam,
sitting up now, sprawled on the ground no longer,
just regaining his strength, just beginning
to recognize his comrades round about him . . .
His heavy sweating, his hard breathing stopped
the moment the will of storming Zeus revived him.
Apollo the Archer stood beside him, taunting,
"Hector, son of Priam, why so far from your troops?
Sitting here, half dead—some trouble's come your way?"

 

Hector struggled for words, his helmet flashing:
"Who are you, my lord—who of the high gods—
to probe me face-to-face?
Haven't you heard? I was killing his friends
against the ships when the lord of the war cry Ajax
struck me down with a boulder square across my chest
he took the fight right out of Me, I can tell you . . .
I thought for certain I'd go to join the dead,
descend to the House of Death this very day—
I thought I'd breathed my last."
But lord Apollo
the distant deadly Archer reassured him: "Courage!
Look what a strong support the son of Cronus
speeds from Ida to take your side and shield you—
I am Phoebus Apollo, lord of the golden sword!
I who saved you before, and along with you
your towering city too. So up now, Hector—
command your drivers here in all their hundreds
to lash their plunging teams at the hollow ships.
And I'll surge on ahead, clearing the whole way
for the teams' assault—I'll bend the Argives back!"

 

  That breathed tremendous strength in the famous captain.
As a stallion full-fed at the manger, stalled too long,
breaking free of his tether gallops down the plain,
out for his favorite plunge in a river's cool currents,
thundering in his pride—his head flung back, his mane
streaming over his shoulders, sure and sleek in his glory,
knees racing him on to the fields and stallion-haunts he loves—
so Hector hurtled on, his legs driving, his'knees pumping,
spurring his reinsmen once he heard the god's command.
And the Argives wheeled and gave ground quickly.
Think how dogs and huntsmen off in the wilds
rush some antlered stag or skittish mountain goat
but a rocky gorge or shadowed forest gives him shelter—
they see it's not their lot to bring that quarry down,
their shouting only flushes a great bearded lion
ramping across their path, suddenly charging them,
scattering men and packs despite their lust for battle—
so up till now the Achaeans kept advancing, close formation,
stabbing away with swords and rugged two-edged spears
but once they saw tall Hector attack the ranks again
they wheeled in terror—hearts collapsed at their heels.

 

  But Thoas son of Andraemon spurred them on,
Aetolia's best by far, skilled with the spear,
superb at cut-and-thrust
and few Achaeans could put him down in debate
when the young men vie and struggle over points.
Now forth he came with calls to back his comrades:
"Look—a genuine miracle right before my eyes!
Hector's escaped again, he's risen from the dead!
And just as each of us hoped with all his heart
he'd dropped and died at the hands of giant Ajax.
But again some god swoops down and saves this Hector—
and hasn't he wiped enough of us out already?
Now he'll make more slaughter, well I know.
He'd never be at the front, smashing our lines
unless Old Thunder, Zeus, had put him on his feet.
So come, friends, do as I say-all take my lead.
The rank and file go back, withdraw to the ships,
but we who claim to be the armies' finest champions
stand our ground-face him first, try to beat him off!
Spears at the readyl For all his fury, trust me,
he'll quake before he penetrates our front."
Sound tactics—
the captains hung on his words and all fell in line.
Squads forming around Great Ajax, King Idomeneus,
Teucer, Meriones and Meges a match for Ares
closed tight for the onset, calling all their best
to brace and face Prince Hector and Hector's Trojans.
Behind them rank and file withdrew to Achaea's ships.

 

  But packed in a mass the Trojans came on pounding,
Hector leading the way with long, leaping strides
and heading the van in person came the god Apollo,
shoulders wrapped in cloud, gripping the storm-shield,
the tempest terror, dazzling, tassels flaring along its front—
The bronzesmith god of fire gave it to Zeus to bear
and strike fear in men and Apollo gripped it now,
locked in his two fists as he led the Trojans on.

 

  But packed in a mass the Argives stood their ground,
deafening cries of battle breaking from both sides
as whipping arrows leapt away from bowstrings.
Showers of spears raining from daring, hardy arms
went deep into soldiers' bodies quick to fight
but showers of others, cut short
halfway before they could graze glistening skin,
stuck in the ground, still lusting to sink in flesh.
Long as Apollo held the storm-shield firm in his grasp
the weapons hurtled side-to-side and men kept falling . . .
But once he looked the fast Achaean drivers square in the eyes,
shook the shield and loosed an enormous battle cry himself,
Apollo stunned the high courage in all their chests—
they lost their grip, forgot their fighting-fury.
Routed like herds of cattle or big flocks of sheep
when two wild beasts stampede them away in terror,
suddenly pouncing down in their midst-pitch darkness,
the shepherd off and gone—so the defenseless Argives
panicked, routed. Apollo hurled fear in their hearts
and handed Hector and all his Trojans instarit glory.

 

  There man killed man in the mad scatter of battle.
Hector finished Stichius, finished Arcesilaus off,
the one a chief of Boeotians armed in bronze,
the other, brave Menelaus' trusty comrade.
Aeneas slaughtered Medon and lasus outright,
Medon the bastard son of royal King Oileus,
Little Ajax' brother, but Medon lived in Phylace,
banished from native land—he'd killed a kinsman
dear to Oileus' wife, his stepmother Eriopis.
But lasus became a captain of Athens' troops,
Sphelus' son he was called and Bucolus' grandson.
Polydamas killed Mecisteus—
 Polites cut down Echius,
first in the onset—
 dashing Agenor cut down Clonius—
and Paris lanced Deiochus deep below the shoulder,
ran him through from behind as he fled the front
and the bronze spear came jutting out his chest.
While the Trojans tore the war-gear off the bodies
Argives clambered back in a tangled mass, scrambling back
through the sharp stakes and deep pit of the trench,
fleeing left and right, forced inside the rampart.
So Hector commanded his Trojans, sounding out,
"Now storm the ships! Drop those bloody spoils!
Any straggler I catch, hanging back from the fleet,
right here on the spot I'll put that man to death.
No kin, no women commit his corpse to the flames—
the dogs will tear his flesh before our walls!"

 

  With a full-shoulder stroke he flogged his horses on,
loosing a splitting war cry down the Trojan ranks
and all cried back in answer-a savage roar rising—
driving teams and chariots close in line with his.
And Apollo far in the lead, the god's feet kicking
the banks of the deep trench down with a god's ease,
tumbled earth in the pit between, bridging it with a dike
immense and wide and long as a hurtling spear will fly
when a man makes practice casts to test his strength.
Holding formation now the Trojans rolled across it,
Apollo heading them, gripping the awesome storm-shield
and he tore that Argive rampart down with the same ease
some boy at the seashore knocks sand castles down—
he no sooner builds his playthings up, child's play,
than he wrecks them all with hands and kicking feet,
just for the sport of it. God of the wild cry, Apollo—
so you wrecked the Achaeans' work and drove the men
who had built it up with all that grief and labor
into headlong panic rout.
 Achaeans stampeding back
till they reined in hard, huddling tight by the stems
and shouting out to each other, flung their arms
to all the immortals, each man crying out a prayer.
But none as rapt as Nestor, Achaea's watch and ward,
who stretched his hands to the starry skies and prayed,
"Father Zeus! If ever in Argos' golden wheatlands

 

one of us burned the fat thighs of sheep or bulls
and begged a safe return and you promised with a nod—
remember it now, Olympian. Save us from this ruthless day!
Don't let these Trojans mow us down in droves!"
So he pleaded
and hearing the old man's prayers, Zeus who rules the world
let loose a great crack of thunder, rending the skies.
But Trojans, thrilled at the sound of Zeus's thunder,
pitched themselves at the Argives still more fiercely,
summoning up their fiery lust for battle.
Like a giant breaker rearing up on the rangy seas,
crashing over a ship's sides, driven in by the winds
and the blast builds the comber's crushing impact—
a hoarse roar!—Trojans stormed over the rampart,
lashing their teams to fight against the ships,
hurling their two-edged spears at close range there,
Trojans from lurching cars but Achaeans from high decks,
scrambling aloft black hulls, lunged down with the long pikes—
jointed and clinched and tipped with ripping bronze—
they'd kept on board for bloody fights at sea.
Now,
as long as the armies fought to take the rampart,
far from the fast ships, Patroclus sat it out
in his friend Eurypylus' shelter . . .460
trying to lift the soldier's heart with stories,
applying soothing drugs to his dreadful wound
as he sought to calm the black waves of pain.
But soon as he heard the Trojans storm the wall
and shouts rise from Achaeans lost in panic rout,
Patroclus gave a groan and slapping his thighs hard
with the flats of both hands, burst forth in anguish:
"I can't stay here with you any longer, Eurypylus,
much as you need me—there, a great battle breaks!
No, let an aide attend you here while I rush back
to Achilles, spur him into combat. Who knows?
With a god's help I just might rouse him now,
bring his fighting spirit round at last.
The persuasion of a comrade has its nnwerc"
With the last words his feet, sped him on.
Meanwhile the Argives blocked the Trojan assault
but they still could not repel them from the fleet,
outnumbering them as they did. Nor could the Trojans
once break through the Argives' bulking forward mass
and force their passage through to ships and shelters.
Tense as a chalk-line marks the cut of a ship timber,
drawn taut and true in a skilled shipwright's hands—
some master craftsman trained in Athena's school—
so tense the battle line was drawn, dead even . . .
Some forces at some ships, some clashing at others,
but Hector charged head-on at Ajax braced for battle
and both warriors fought it out for a single vessel,
nor could Hector burst through and ignite the hull
nor Ajax drive him back—a god drove Hector on.
And here came Caletor son of Trojan Clytius
sweeping fire against the prow but famous Ajax
stopped him short with a spear that stabbed his chest.
Down he crashed, the torch dropped from his fist,
right before Hector's eyes—he watched his cousin
sprawl in the dust before the huge black ship
and gave a stirring cry to all his units:
"Trojans! Lyciansl Dardan fighters hand-to-hand,
don't yield an inch, not in these bloody straits!
Rescue Caletor before the Argives strip his gear—
he's down, he's dead by the ships that crowd the beach!"

 

  As he raised that cry he flung his spear at Ajax—
but the glinting metal missed and he hit Mastor's son,
Lycophron, Ajax' friend-in-arms, Cythera-bom
yet he lived with Ajax once he'd killed a man
on Cythera's holy shores. Hector killed him now
with whetted bronze, cleaving his skull above the ear
as he stood by Ajax. Down off the ship's stem he dropped,
his back slamming the ground, his limbs slack in death,
and Ajax shuddered, calling out to his brother,
"Teucer, my friend—our trusted comrade's dead,
Mastor's son who came our way from Cythera.
We lived in our halls together, prized the man
as we prize our beloved parents—Hector's killed him!
Hurry, where are your arrows fletched with death?
Where is the bow that god Apollo gave you?"

 

  Teucer took the challenge, rushed to his side
and reflex bow in hand and quiver bristling shafts
he loosed a splattering burst against the Trojans.
He picked off Clitus, Pisenor's shining son—
the charioteer to noble Panthous' son Polydamas—
wrestling the reins, struggling to head his horses
straight for the point where most battalions panicked,
eager to please Prince Hector and all his Trojans,
Clitus raced on but his death came even faster.
No one could save him now, strain as they did—
a sudden arrow jabbed him behind the neck,
pierced him with pain and out the car he hurtled—
horses rearing in terror, empty chariot clattering off.
But their master Polydamas marked the kill at once,
ran and planted himself across the horses' path
and handed them on to Protiaon's son Astynous,
shouting strict commands—"Watch my every move!
Keep the team close by!"—then veering away himself,
back again to grapple frontline troops.
But Teucer—
quick with his next shaft the archer aimed at Hector,
at Hector's brazen crest, and would have stopped
his assault on Argive ships, hit him squarely
and torn his life out just as his courage peaked.
But he could not dodge the lightning mind of Zeus—
standing guard over Hector
Zeus tore the glory right from Teucer's grasp,
he snapped the twisted cord on his handsome bow
just as the archer drew it taut against his man
and the weighted bronze shaft skittered off to the side,
the bow dropped from his hand and Teucer shuddered,
calling out to his brother, "Oh what luck—look,
some power cuts us out of the fighting, foils our plans!
He's knocked the bow from my grip, snapped the string,
the fresh gut I tied to the weapon just at dawn
to launch the showers of arrows I'd let fly."

 

  "Too bad, my friend," said Ajax. "Leave them there,
that bow and spill of arrows down on the ground—
a god with a grudge against us wrecks them all.
Take up a long spear, shield on your shoulder,
go for the Trojans, urge your troops to battle.
Maybe they've whipped us here but not without a fight
will they take our benched ships. Call up the joy of war!"

 

  At that his brother dropped his bow in a shelter,
slung a shield on his shoulder, four plies thick,
over his powerful head he set a well-forged helmet,
the horsehair crest atop it tossing, bristling terror.
And taking a rugged spearshaft tipped with whetted bronze
the archer went on the run to stand by Ajax' side.

 

  But Hector, seeing Teucer's arrows in disarray,
let fly a resounding shout to all his units:
"Trojans! Lyciansl Dardan fighters hand-to-hand!
Fight like men, my friends, call up your battle-fury—
make for the hollow ships! I see with my own eyes
how Zeus has blocked their finest archer's arrows.
Easy to see what help Zeus lends to mortals,
either to those he gives surpassing glory
or those he saps and wastes, refuses to defend,
just as he wastes the Argives' power but backs us now.
So fight by the ships, all together. And that comrade
who meets his death and destiny, speared or stabbed,
let him die! He dies fighting for fatherland—
no dishonor there!
He'll leave behind him wife and sons unscathed,
his house and estate unharmed—once these Argives
sail for home, the fatherland they love."
That was his cry
as Hector put fresh fighting spirit in each man.
But Ajax fired the troops on his side too:
"Shame, you Argives! All or nothing now—
die, or live and drive defeat from the ships!
You want this flashing Hector to take the fleet
then each man walk the waves to regain his native land?
Can't you hear him calling his armies on, full force,
this Hector, wild to gut our hulls with fire?
He's not inviting them to a dance, believe me—
he commands them into battle! No better tactics now
than to fight them hand-to-hand with all our fury.
Quick, better to live or die, once and for all,
than die by inches, slowly crushed to.death—
helpless against the hulls in the bloody press—
by far inferior men!"
 And that was Ajax' cry
as the giant put fresh fighting spirit in each man.
But Hector cut down Schedius now, Perimedes' son,
a Phocian chieftain—and Ajax killed Laodamas,
captain of infantry, Antenor's splendid son—
and Polydamas killed Cyllenian Otus outright,
Meges' friend, one of the proud Epeans' leaders.
Meges saw him drop, he lunged at Polydamas, fast,
but he ducked and veered away and Meges missed him—
Apollo was not about to let him fall at the front,
not Panthous' son. But Meges did hit Croesmus,
stabbed him square in the chest with a thrusting-lance
and down he crashed—with Meges tearing the armor off his back
as the Trojan Dolops lunged at him. A crack spearman—
Laomedon's grandson, Lampus' big and brawny son,
the strongest he sired, the best trained for assault—
Dolops quickly went for Meges at close range,
he speared his bulging shield
but the solid breastplate warded off the blow
with both plates fitted tight to bind his body.
The gear his father brought from Ephyra once . . .
the Selleis banks where his host the lord Euphetes
gave him that sturdy bronze to wear in battle,
to beat off the bloody attacks of desperate men
and now it saved his son's young flesh from death.
So Meges chopped at the crown of Dolops' bronze helmet,
split its spiny ridge with a sharp cleaving spear
and sheared away its bristling horsehair crest.
Down in the dust the war-gear tumbled, all
still glistening bright in its fresh purple dye
but the man stood his ground, still rearing to fight,
his hopes still soaring for triumph. But now Menelaus,
Atrides out for blood, moved in to fight for Meges—
spear poised in his grip-in from the blind side
and struck from behind the Trojan's shoulder so hard
the spear came jutting out through his chest in all its fury
and Dolops reeled and sank, facedown on the ground.
The two men swarmed over him, ripping the armor
off his back as Hector called his kinsmen on,
all his kinsmen, but marked out Hicetaon's son
the strong Melanippus, railing first at him . . .
He used to graze his shambling herds in Percote,
long ago when the enemy's forces stood far off
but once the rolling ships of Achaea swept ashore,
home he came to Troy where he shone among the Trojans,
living close to Priam, who prized him like his sons.
But Hector rebuked him now, shouting out his name:
"Melanippus-how can we take things lying down this way?
No qualm in your heart for this? Your cousin's dead!
Can't you see how they're clawing over Dolops' armor?
Follow me now. No more standing back, no fighting
these Argives at a distance—kill them hand-to-hand.
Now-before they topple towering Ilium down,
all our people slaughtered!"
So with a shout
he surged ahead and his gallant cohort followed.
But Great Telamonian Ajax spurred his Argives on:
"Be men, my friends! Discipline fill your hearts!
Dread what comrades say of you here in bloody combat!
When men dread that, more men come through alive—
when soldiers break and run, good-bye glory,
good-bye all defenses!"
 Up in arms as they were
to shield themselves, they took his word to heart,
and round the ships they raised a wall of bronze.
But against them Zeus impelled the Trojan ranks
as Menelaus lord of the war cry urged Antilochus,
"None of the younger troops, Antilochus, none
is faster of foot than you or tougher in combat—
why not leap right in and lay some Trojan out?"

 

  Menelaus withdrew as he drove Antilochus on.
Out of the front he sprang, glaring left and right
and hurled his spear—a glinting brazen streak—
and the Trojans scattered, cringing before his shaft . . .
no wasted shot! Antilochus hit Hicetaon's son,
impetuous Melanippus sweeping into battle,
slashed him across the chest beside the nipple.
Down he crashed and the darkness swirled his eyes
with Antilochus rushing over him like some hound
pouncing down on a deer that's just been wounded—
leaping out of its lair a hunter's speared it,
a lethal hit that's loosed its springy limbs.
So staunch Antilochus leapt at you, Melanippus,
stripping away your gear, but Hector marked it now
and straight through the ruck he charged Antilochus hard.
Quick as that fighter was, he could not hold his ground,
not there—he turned tail and broke like a rogue beast
that's done some serious damage, mauled a dog to death
or a herdsman tending flocks, and takes to his heels
before the gangs of men can group and go against him.
So Antilochus turned and ran as a savage cry went up
and Hector and all his Trojans showered deadly shafts
in hot pursuit, but he wheeled and stood his ground
when he reached his thronging cohorts.
Now to the ships—
now like a pride of man-eating lions the Trojan forces
stormed the fleet, fulfilling Zeus's strict commands
as Zeus kept building their fury higher, stunned
the Argives' spirit and wrenched away their glory,
lashing Trojans on. The Father's will was set
on giving glory over to Hector son of Priam
that he might hurl his torch at the beaked ships—
the force of fire, quenchless, ravening fire, yes,
and bring to its bitter end the disastrous prayer of Thetis.
For that alone he waited, the god who rules the world,
to see with his own eyes the first Achaean ship
go up in a blaze of flames. Then, from that point on
he'd thrust the Trojans breakneck back from the fleet
and give the Argives glory. Dead set now on that,
he drove Prince Hector against the hollow hulls
though the son of Priam raged in his own right,
raged like Ares with brandished spear, or flash fire
roaring down from a ridge into thick stands of timber.
The foam flecked his mouth and his eyes shot flame,
glaring under his shaggy brows and round his head
his helmet shook and clashed, a terrific wild din—
Hector on the attack! And high in the clear sky
Zeus himself defended his champion-Hector alone
he prized and glorified among hordes of men
for Hector's life would be cut short so soon . . .
Why, even now Athena was speeding the fatal day
when he would fall to the power of great Achilles.
But now he was bent on breaking men, probing the lines
wherever he saw the largest mass and the finest gear
but he could not smash through yet for all his fury.
They closed ranks, they packed like a stone wall,
a granite cliff that towers against the churning surf,
standing up to the screaming winds, their sudden assaults
and the breaking waves they spawn that crash against its base—
so the Danaans stood the Trojan onslaught, rock-solid
and never flinched in fear. But Hector all afire,
blazing head to foot, charged at their main force,
bursting down as a wave bursts down on a veering ship,
down from under the clouds it batters, bred by gale-winds—
showers of foam overwhelmm the hull, blot it all from sight,
the hurricane's killing blast thundering into the sails
and scudding clear of death by the skin of their teeth
the sailors quake, their hearts race on with terror—
so the Achaeans' courage quaked. And Hector lunged again
like a murderous lion mad for kills, charging cattle
grazing across the flats of a broad marshy pasture,
flocks by the hundred led by an unskilled herdsman
helpless to keep the marauder off a longhorn heifer—
no fighting that bloody slaughter—all he can do
is keep pace with the lead or straggling heads,
leaving the center free for the big cat's pounce
and it eats a heifer raw as the rest stampede away.
And so the Achaeans stampeded now, unearthly terror,
all of them routed now by Father Zeus and Hector—
though Hector killed just one . . .
Periphetes, a Mycenaean, favorite son of Copreus,
Eurystheus' herald who summoned rugged Heracles
time and again to grinding labors. Copreus, yes,
that worthless father who sired a better son,
better at every skill, primed for speed and war
and his wits outstripped the best in all Mycenae,
but all of it went now to build Prince Hector's glory.
As the Argive spun in retreat his shield-rim tripped him—
down to his feet that shield he bore to keep off spears—
he stumbled over it now, pitched back, helmet clanging
harshly against his brows. as the man hit the ground,
But Hector marked him at once, rushed up to his side
and staked a spear in his chest to kill the fighter
right in the eyes of loyal comrades standing, by.
Sick for their friend but what could they do? Nothing—
just shake with dread in the face of mighty Hector.

 

  Now the Achaeans milled among the shipways,
shielded round by the looming superstructures,
stem on stern drawn up on the first line inland.
But the Trojans stormed them there and back they fell,
they had no choice, edging away from the front ships
but once at the tents nearby they held their ground,
massing ranks, no scattering back through camp.
Their proud discipline gripped them, terror too—
they rallied each other, nonstop, war cries rising.
Noble Nestor was first, Achaea's watch and ward,
pleading, begging each man for his parents' sake,
"Be men, my friends! Discipline fill your hearts,
maintain your pride in the eyes of other men!
Remember, each of you, sons, wives, wealth, parents—
are mother and father dead or alive? No matter,
I beg you for their sakes, loved ones far away—
now stand and fight, no turning back, no panic."

 

  With that he put new strength in each man's spirit.
Athena thrust from their eyes the blinding battle-haze,
the darkness sent by the gods, and a hard bright light
burst down in both directions, out to the ships
and down the lines where fighting drew dead even.
Now they could make out Hector lord of the war cry,
all his troops, squads in reserve and clear of battle,
forward squads that fought at the fast trim ships.

 

  Ajax' challenge—how could it please his courage still
to hang back now where other Achaeans held the rear?
No more. Up and down the decks of the ships he went
with his great plunging strides, swinging in hand
his enormous polished pike for fights at sea,
clamped with clinchers, twenty-two forearms long.
Ajax skilled as a show-rider, a virtuoso horseman
who picks from the herd four stallions, yokes them tight
and galloping off the plain comes racing toward a large city,
over a trafficked road and the crowds gaze in wonder,
men and women watching, as sure-footed, never a slip,
the rider keeps on leaping, swinging from back to back
and the pounding team flies on. So Ajax swung now,
leaping from deck to deck on the fast trim ships,
ranging with huge strides as his voice hit the skies,
keeping up a terrific bellowing, calling Argives on
to defend the ships and shelters.
And Hector too—
how could he hold back with his massing, armored Trojans?
Now like a flashing eagle swooping down on bird-flocks,
winged thousands feeding, swarming a river's banks,
geese, cranes or swans with their long lancing necks—
so swooping Hector went headfirst at a warship,
charged its purple prow, and Zeus behind him
thrust him on with his mighty, deathless hand,
urging the soldiers on who crowded Hector's back.

 

  And again a desperate battle broke at the ships.
You'd think they waded into the fighting, fresh troops,
unbruised, unbroken, they fought with such new fire.
And what were the fighters thinking? Only this:
the Argives certain they'd never flee the worst,
they'd perish then and there,
but the hopes soared in every Trojan's heart
to torch the ships and slaughter Argive heroes—
so ran their thoughts, closing for the kill. At last
Hector grappled a ship's stern, a beauty built for speed—
it swept the seas with Protesilaus, bore him to Troy
but never bore him back to his fatherland again.
Now churning round that ship Achaeans and Trojans
hacked each other at close range. No more war at a distance,
waiting to take the long flights of spears and arrows—
they stood there man-to-man and matched their fury,
killing each other now with hatchets, battle-axes,
big swords, two-edged spears, and many a blade,
magnificent, heavy-hilted and thonged in black
lay strewn on the ground-some dropped from hands,
some fell as the fighters' shoulder-straps were cut—
and the earth ran black with blood. And Hector held fast,
he never let go of the high stem, he hugged its horn,
arms locked in a death-grip, crying out to Trojans,
"Bring fire! Up with the war cries, all together!
Now Zeus hands us a day worth all the rest,
today we seize these ships—
they stormed ashore against the will of the gods,
they came here freighted with years of pain for us,
and all thanks to our city elders. What cowards!
Whenever I longed to fight at the ships' high stems
the old men kept me back, they held the troops in check.
Oh but if Zeus's lightning blinded us those days,
it's Zeus who drives us, hurls us on today!"
The harder he cried
the harder his forces charged against the Argives.
Not even Ajax held his post, no longer now:
forced by the shafts he backed away by inches,
certain he'd die' there-down he leapt from the decks,
down to bestride the seven-foot bridge amidships.
There he stood, tensing, braced to take them on—
his huge pike kept beating the Trojans off the hulls,
any attacker flinging tireless fire, and all the time
that terrible voice of his, bellowing out to cohorts,
"Friends! Fighting Danaans! Aides-in-arms of Ares!
Fight like men, my comrades-call up your battle-fury!
You think we have reserves in the rear to back us up?
Some stronger wall to shield our men from disaster?
No, there's no great citadel standing near with towers
where we could defend ourselves and troops could turn the tide.
No—we're here on the plain of Troy—all Troy's in arms!
Dug in, backs to the sea, land of our fathers far away!
Fight—the light of safety lies in our fighting hands,
not spines gone soft in battle!"
And with each cry
he thrust his slashing pike with a fresh new fury.
And any Trojan crashing against. the beaked ships,
torch ablaze in hand, straining to please Hector
who urged him on . . . Ajax ready and waiting there
would stab each man with his long, rugged pike—
twelve he impaled point-blank, struggling up the hulls.

So they fought to the death around that benched beaked ship
as Patroclus reached Achilles, his great commander,
and wept warm tears like a dark spring running down
some desolate rock face, its shaded currents flowing.
And the brilliant runner Achilles saw him coming,
filled with pity and spoke out winging words:
"Why in tears, Patroclus?
Like a girl, a baby running after her mother,
begging to be picked up, and she tugs her skirts,
holding her back as she tries to hurry off—all tears,
fawning up at her, till she takes her in her arms . . .
That's how you look, Patroclus, streaming live tears.
But why? Some news for the Myrmidons, news for me?
Some message from Phthia that you alone have heard?
They tell me Menoetius, Actor's son, is still alive,
and Peleus, Aeacus' son, lives on among his Myrmidons—
if both our fathers had died, we'd have some cause for grief.
Or weeping over the Argives, are you? Seeing them die
against the hollow ships, repaid for their offenses?
Out with it now! Don't harbor it deep inside you.
We must share it all."
  With a wrenching. groan
you answered your friend, Patroclus O my rider:
"Achilles, son of Peleus, greatest of the Achaeans,
spare me your anger, please—
such heavy blows have overwhelmed the troops.
Our former champions, all laid up in the ships,
all are hit by arrows or run through by spears.
There's powerful Diomedes brought down by an archer,
Odysseus wounded, and Agamemnon too, the famous spearman,
and Eurypylus took an arrow-shot in the thigh . . .
Healers are working over them, using all their drugs,
trying to bind the wounds—
But you are intractable, Achilles!
Pray god such anger never seizes me, such rage you nurse.
Cursed in your own courage! What good will a man,
even one in the next generation, get from you
unless you defend the Argives from disaster?
You heart of iron! He was not your father,
the horseman Peleus—Thetis was not your mother.
Never. The salt gray sunless ocean gave you birth
and the towering blank rocks—your temper's so relentless.
But still, if down deep some prophecy makes you balk,
some doom your noble mother revealed to you from Zeus,
well and good: at least send me into battle, quickly.
Let the whole Myrmidon army follow my command—
I might bring some light of victory to our Argives!
And give me your own fine armor to buckle on my back,
so the Trojans might take me for you, Achilles, yes,
hold off from attack, and Achaea's fighting sons
get second wind, exhausted as they are . . .
Breathing room in war is all too brief.
We're fresh, unbroken. The enemy's battle-weary—
we could roll those broken Trojans back to Troy,
clear of the ships and shelters!"
So he pleaded,
lost in his own great innocence . . .
condemned to beg for his own death and brutal doom.
And moved now to his depths, the famous runner cried,
"No, no, my prince, Patroclus, what are you saying?
Prophecies? None that touch me. None I know of.
No doom my noble mother revealed to me from Zeus,
just this terrible pain that wounds me to the quick—
when one man attempts to plunder a man his equal,
to commandeer a prize, exulting so in his own power.
That's the pain that wounds me, suffering such humiliation.
That girl—the sons of Achaea picked her as my prize,
and I'd sacked a walled city, won her with my spear
but right from my grasp he tears her, mighty Agamemnon,
that son of Atreus! Treating me like some vagabond,
some outcast stripped of all my rights . . .
Enough.
Let bygones be bygones now. Done is done.
How on earth can a man rage on forever?
Still, by god, I said I would not relax my anger,
not till the cries and carnage reached my own ships.
So you, you strap my splendid armor on your back,
you lead our battle-hungry Myrmidons into action!—
if now, in fact, the black cloud of the Trojans
blasts down on the ships with full gale force,
our backs to the breaking surf but clinging still
to a cramped strip of land—the Argives, lost.
The whole city of Troy comes trampling down on us,
daring, wild—why? They cannot see the brow of my helmet
flash before their eyes—Oh they'd soon run for their lives
and choke the torrent-beds of the field with all their corpses
if only the mighty Agamemnon met me with respect:
now, as it is, they're fighting round our camp!
No spear rages now in the hand of Diomedes,
keen to save the Argives from disaster . . .
I can't even hear the battle cry of Agamemnon
break from his hated skull. But it's man-killing Hector
calling his Trojans on, his war cries crashing round me,
savage cries of his Trojans sweeping the whole plain,
victors bringing the Argive armies to their knees.
Even so, Patroclus, fight disaster off the ships,
fling yourself at the Trojans full force—
before they gut our hulls with leaping fire
and tear away the beloved day of our return.
But take this command to heart—obey it to the end.
So you can win great honor, great glory for me
in the eyes of all the Argive ranks, and they,
they'll send her back, my lithe and lovely girl,
and top it off with troves of glittering gifts.
Once you have whipped the enemy from the fleet
you must come back, Patroclus. Even if Zeus
the thundering lord of Hera lets you seize your glory,
you must not bum for war against these Trojans,
madmen lusting for battle—not without me—
you will only make my glory that much less . . .
You must not, lost in the flush and fire of triumph,
slaughtering Trojans outright, drive your troops to Troy—
what if one of the gods who never die comes down
from Olympus heights to intervene in battle?
The deadly Archer loves his Trojans dearly.
No, you must turn back—
soon as you bring the light of victory to the ships.
Let the rest of them cut themselves to pieces on the plain!
Oh would to god—Father Zeus, Athena and lord Apollo—
not one of all these Trojans could flee his death, not one,
no Argive either, but we could stride from the slaughter
so we could bring Troy's hallowed crown of towers
toppling down around us—you and I alone!

 

  And so the comrades roused each other now.
But Ajax could hold his post on the decks no longer.
He was overwhelmed by the latest salvos, driven back
by the will of Zeus and the fearless Trojan spearmen
hurling blows nonstop—a terrific din at his temples,
his shining helmet clashing under repeated blows,
relentless blows beating his forged cheek-irons.
And the joint of his left shoulder ached with labor,
forever bracing his huge burnished shield rock-steady,
but they could not wrench it loose from round his body
for all their pelting weapons. Again and again
he fought for breath, gasping, bathed in sweat
rivering down his body, his limbs soaked and sleek . . .
where could he find some breathing room in battle?
Wherever he looked, pains heaped on pains.
Sing to me now,
you Muses, you who hold Olympus' vaulting halls,
how fire was first pitched on Achaea's ships!

 

  Hector lunged at Ajax toe-to-toe,
hacked his ash-wood pike with a heavy sword
and striking the socket just behind the point
he slashed the head clean off, leaving the shaft,
the lopped stump dangling in Ajax' fist, useless,
bronze head bounding away, clanging along the ground.
And deep in his heart brave Ajax knew and shuddered—
here was work of the gods, thundering Zeus on high,
cutting him off from battle, dashing all his plans,
Zeus, determined to grant the Trojans triumph now.
So Ajax drew back, out of range, and then—
they flung their tireless fire at a fast trim ship.
She was up in flames at once, engulfed in quenchless fire,
in a flash the blaze went swirling round the stem
and Achilles slapped his thighs and urged Patroclus,
"To arms—Patroclus, prince and master horseman!
I can see the blaze go roaring up the ships.
They must not destroy them. No escape-route then.
Quick, strap on my gear—I'll rouse the troops."
That was all,
and Patroclus armed himself in Achilles' gleaming bronze.
First he wrapped his legs with the well-made greaves,
fastened behind the heels with silver ankle-clasps,
next he strapped the breastplate round his chest,
blazoned with stars—swift Achilles' own—
then over his shoulder Patroclus slung the sword,
the fine bronze blade with its silver-studded hilt,
and then the shield-strap and the sturdy, massive shield
and over his powerful head he set the well-forged helmet,
the horsehair crest atop it tossing, bristling terror,
and he took two rugged spears that fit his grip.
And Achilles' only weapon Patroclus did not take
was the great man's spear, weighted, heavy, tough.
No other Achaean fighter could heft that shaft,
only Achilles had the skill to wield it well:
Pelian ash it was, a gift to his father Peleus
presented by Chiron once, hewn on Pelion's crest
to be the death of heroes.
  Now the war-team.
Patroclus ordered Automedon to yoke them quickly—
a man he honored next to Achilles breaker of men,
always firmest in battle, nerved to wait the call.
So at his command Automedon yoked the horses,
the rapid stallions Roan Beauty and Dapple,
the team that raced the gales, magnificent team
the storm-wind filly Lightfoot foaled for the West Wind,
grazing the lush green grass along the Ocean's tides.
And into the traces he ran the purebred Bold Dancer—
Achilles seized him once when he stormed Eetion's city,
a mortal war-horse pacing immortal horses now.

 

  Prince Achilles, ranging his ranks of Myrmidons,
arrayed them along the shelters, all in armor.
Hungry as wolves that rend and bolt raw flesh,
hearts filled with battle-frenzy that never dies—
off on the cliffs, ripping apart some big antlered stag
they gorge on the kill till all their jaws drip red with blood,
then down in a pack they lope to a pooling, dark spring—
their their lean sharp tongues lapping the water's surface,
belching bloody meat, but the fury, never shaken,
builds inside their chests though their glutted bellies burst—
so wild the Myrmidon captains, Myrmidon field commanders
swarming round Achilles' dauntless friend-in-arms.
And there in the midst Achilles stood like the god of war,
urging his charioteers and fighters bracing shields.

 

  There were fifty fast black ships that bore his troops
when Achilles dear to Zeus sailed east for Troy.
Fifty fighters aboard each, manning the oarlocks,
five captains he named, entrusted with command,
but he himself in his martial power ruled them all . . .
The first battalion was led by Menesthius bright in bronze,
son of Spercheus River swelled by the rains of Zeus
and bom by the lovely Polydora, Peleus' daughter,
when a girl and the god of a tireless river bedded down.
But they called him the son of Borus, Perieres' son
who showered the girl with countless bridal gifts,
his wedded bride in the sight of all the world.
The next battalion was led by fighting Eudorus,
bom out of wedlock too. Phylas' daughter,
Polymela the gorgeous dancer bore the man
when irresistible Hermes, Hermes the giant-killer
lusted for her once—she ravished the god's bright eyes,
swaying among the dancers singing goddess Artemis
with arrow of gold and cry that halloos the hunt.
And straightway up to her chamber Hermes climbed,
the Healer, in secret, lay in her arms in love
and the woman bore the god a radiant son, Eudorus—
lightning on his feet and a crack man of war.
But soon as the Lady of Labor's birthing pangs
brought him to light and he saw the blaze of day,
Actor's majestic son the powerful lord Echecles
led her home to his house with troves of bridal gifts
while old King Phylas reared the boy with kindness,
tending, embracing the young Eudorus like a son.
The third battalion was led by brave Pisander,
Maemalus' son, who outfought them all with spears,
all the Myrmidons after Achilles' friend Patroclus.
The fourth was led by the old horseman Phoenix,
Alcimedon led the fifth, Laerces' gallant son.
But soon as Achilles mustered all battalions,
positioned in battle-order led by captains,
he imposed this stem command on all his troops:
"Myrmidons! Not one of you dare forget those threats
you hurled from the fast trim ships against the Trojans
all the while I raged, and I was the one you blamed,
down to the last fighter: 'Brutal son of Peleus—
your mother nursed you on galll Merciless, iron man—
confining your own men to the ships against their will!
So home we go in those ships and cut the seas again,
since now such deadly anger strikes our captain.'
Denouncing me—
my comrades, clustered together, always grumbling.
Well, here's a tremendous work of battle, look,
blazing before your eyes
and just the sort you longed for all those days.
So each man tense with courage—fight the Trojans down!"

 

  That was the cry that fired each soldier's heart.
Hearing the king's command the ranks pulled closer,
tight as a mason packs a good stone wall,
blocks on granite blocks for a storied house
that fights the ripping winds—crammed so close
the crested helmets, the war-shields bulging, jutting,
buckler-to-buckler, helm-to-helm, man-to-man massed tight
and the horsehair crests on glittering helmet horns brushed
as they tossed their heads, the battalions bulked so dense.
And out before them all, two men took battle-stations,
Patroclus and Automedon, seized with a single fury
to fight in the comrades' vanguard, far in front.

 

  But Achilles strode back to his shelter now
and opened the lid of the princely inlaid sea chest
that glistening-footed Thetis stowed in his ship to carry,
filled to the brim with war-shirts, windproof cloaks
and heavy fleecy rugs. And there it rested . . .
his handsome, well-wrought cup. No other man
would drink the shining wine from its glowing depths,

nor would Achilles pour the wine to any other god,
none but Father Zeus. Lifting it from his chest
he purified it with sulphur crystals first
then rinsed it out with water running clear,
washed his hands and filled it with bright wine.
And then, taking a stand before his lodge, he prayed,
pouring the wine to earthand scanning the high skies
and the god who loves the lightning never missed a word:
"King Zeus—Pelasgian Zeus, lord of Dodona's holy shrine
dwelling far away, brooding over Dodona's bitter winters!
Your prophets dwelling round you, Zeus, the Selli
sleeping along the ground with unwashed feet . . .
If you honored me last time and heard my prayer
and rained destruction down on all Achaea's ranks,
now, once more, I beg you, bring my prayer to pass!
I myself hold out on shore with the beached ships here
but I send my comrade forth to war with troops of Myrmidons—
Launch glory along with him, high lord of thunder, Zeus!
Fill his heart with courage—so even Hector learns
if Patroclus has the skill to fight his wars alone,
my friend-in-arms, or his hands can rage unvanquished
only when I go wading in and face the grind of battle.
But once he repels the roaring onslaught from the ships
let him come back to me and our fast fleet—unharmed—
with all my armor round him, all our comrades
fighting around my friend!"

  so Achilles prayed
and Zeus in all his wisdom heard those prayers.
One prayer the Father granted, the other he denied:
Patroclus would drive the onslaught off the ships—
that much Zeus granted, true,
but denied him safe and sound return from battle.
Once Achilles had poured the wine and prayed to Zeus
he returned to his shelter, stowed the cup in the chest
then took his stand outside, his spirit yearning still
to watch Achaeans and Trojans struggle to the death.

Myrmidons,
battalions ranged in armor with greathearted Patroclus, moving out now, the fury bursting inside them,
suddenly charged the Trojans—
They swarmed forth like wasps from a roadside nest
when boys have made it their sport to set them seething,
day after day tormenting them round their roadside hive—
idiot boys! they make a menace for every man in sight.
Any innocent traveler passing them on that road
can stir them accidentally—up in arms in a flash,
all in a swarm come pouring, each one raging down
to fight for home and children—

Such frenzy seized their hearts,
Myrmidons pouring out of the ships, ceaseless shouts rising
and over them all Patroclus' war cries rousing comrades:
"Myrmidons1 Brothers-in-arms of Peleus' son Achilles!
Fight like men, my friends, call up your battle-fury!
Now we must win high honor for Peleus' royal son,
far the greatest fighter among the Argive fleet,
and we who fight beside him the bravest troops—
so even mighty Atrides can see how mad he was
to disgrace Achilles, the best of the Achaeans!"

  He closed with a shout and fired each fighter's heart
and down in a mass they launched against the Trojans,
ships around them echoing back their shattering cries.

  The Trojans, soon as they saw Menoetius' gallant son,
himself and his loyal driver flare in brazen gear—
all their courage quaked, their columns buckled,
thinking swift Achilles had tossed to the winds
his hard rage that held him back by the ships
and chosen friendship toward the Argives now.
Each Trojan soldier glancing left and right—
how could he run from sudden, plunging death?

 

  Patroclus was first to hurl his glittering spear,
right at the center mass—the fighters milling
round the stern of Protesilius' blazing ship—
and hit Pyraechmes, firebrand who led the Paeonians,
the master riders from Amydon, from Axius' broad currents.
Patroclus slashed his right shoulder and down he went,
his back slamming the dust with a jolting groan
as companions panicked round him—brave Paeonians—
Patroclus whipped the terror in all their hearts
when he killed the chief who topped them all in battle.
He rode them off the ships, he quenched the leaping fire,
leaving Protesilaus' hulk half-burnt but upright still
and the Trojans scattered back with high, shrill cries.
The Argives poured against them, back by the hollow hulls,
the din of battle incessant—
  an Argive breakthrough—
bright as the moment Zeus the lord of lightning moves
from a craggy mountain ridge a storm cloud massing dense
and all the lookout peaks stand out and the jutting cliffs
and the steep ravines and down from the high heavens bursts
the boundless bright air . . . So now the Argives
drove the ravening fire clear of the warships,
winning a little breathing room, not much,
no real halt to the buck-and-rush of battle.
For despite the surge of the Argives primed for war
the Trojans were still not wheeling round in headlong rout
away from the black hulls. Forced back from them, true,
they braced for battle still and made a stand.
Deadlock:
there man killed man in the pell-mell clash of battle,'
captains going at captains. Brave Patroclus first—
just as Areilycus swerved in sudden flight
he gored him in the hip with a slashing spear
and the bronze lancehead hammered through his flesh,
the shaft splintering bone as he pitched face-first,
pounding the ground—
And veteran Menelaus wounded Thoas,
raking his chest where the shield-rim left it bare,
and loosed his limbs—
  And Amphiclus went for Meges
but Meges saw him coming and got in first by far,
spearing him up the thigh where it joins the body,
the spot where a man's muscle bunches thickest:
the tough sinews shredded around the weapon's point
as the dark swirled down his eyes—
  Nestor's sons on attack!
Antilochus struck Atymnius hard with a whetted spear,
the bronze ripping into his flank and clean through
he crashed at his feet
But Maris charged Antilochus,
sweeping in with his lance, enraged for his brother,
planted himself before his corpse but Thrasymedes,
quick as a god, beat him to it he stabbed
before Maris stabbed-no miss! right in the shoulder,
the Argive's spearpoint cracked through the bony socket,
shearing away the tendons, wrenched the whole arm out
and down he thundered, darkness blanked his eyes.
So these two brothers, laid low by the two brothers,
dropped to the world of night: Sarpedon's stalwart cohorts,
spearmen sons of Amisodarus-he who bred the Chimaera,
the grim monster that.sent so many men to death.
There—quick Oilean Ajax rushed Cleobulus,
took him alive, stumbling blind in the rout
but took his life at once, snapped his strength
with a sword that hewed his neckbone-up to the hilt
so the whole blade ran hot with blood, and red death
came flooding down his eyes, and the strong force of fate.
And now in a breakneck charge Peneleos closed with Lycon—
they'd missed each other with spears, two wasted casts,
so now both clashed with swords. Lycon, flailing,
chopped the horn of Peneleos' horsehair-crested helmet
but round the socket the sword-blade smashed to bits—
just as Peneleos hacked his neck below the ear
and the blade sank clean through, nothing held
but a flap of skin, the head swung loose to the side
as Lycon slumped down to the ground . . . There—
at a dead run Meriones ran down Acamas, Acamas
mounting behind his team, and gouged his right shoulder—
he pitched from the car and the mist whirled down his eyes.
Idomeneus skewered Erymas straight through the mouth,
the merciless brazen spearpoint raking through,
up under the brain to split his glistening skull—
teeth shattered out, both eyes brimmed to the lids
with a gush of blood and both nostrils spurting,
mouth gaping, blowing convulsive sprays of blood
and death's dark cloud closed down around his corpse.

 

  So in a rush each Argive captain killed his man.
As ravenous wolves come swooping down on lambs or kids
to snatch them away-from right amidst their flock—all lost
when a careless shepherd leaves them straggling down the hills
and quickly spotting a chance the wolf pack picks them off,
no heart for the fight-so the Achaeans mauled the Trojans.
Shrieking flight the one thing on the Trojans' minds,
they forgot their fighting-fury . . .

 

  Great Ajax now—forever aiming at Hector,
trying to strike his helmet flashing bronze
but Hector was far too seasoned, combat-tested,
broad shoulders hunching under his bull's-hide shield,
his eyes peeled for a whistling shaft or thudding spear.
Hector knew full well the tide of battle had turned
but still stood firm, defending die-hard comrades.

 

  Wild as a storm cloud moving off Olympus into heaven
out of a clear blue sky when Zeus brings cyclones on—
so wild the rout, the cries that came from the ships
as back through the trench they ran, formations wrecked.
And Hector? Hector's speeding horses swept him away,
armor and all, leaving his men to face their fate,
Trojans trapped but struggling on in the deep trench.
Hundreds of plunging war-teams dragging chariots down,
snapping the yoke-poles, ditched their masters' cars
and Patroclus charged them, heart afire for the kill,
shouting his Argives forward—"Slaughter Trojans!"
Cries of terror breaking as Trojans choked all roads,
their lines ripped to pieces, up from under the hoofs
a dust storm swirling into the clouds as rearing horses
broke into stride again and galloped back to Troy,
leaving ships and shelters in their wake. Patroclus—
wherever he saw the biggest masses-dashing before him,
there he steered, plowing ahead with savage cries
and fighters tumbled out of their chariots headfirst,
crushed under their axles, war-cars crashing over, yes,
but straight across the trench went his own careering team
at a superhuman bound. Magnificent racing stallions,
gifts of the gods to Peleus, shining immortal gifts,
straining breakneck on as Patroclus' high courage
urged him against Prince Hector, keen for the kill
but Hector's veering horses swept him clear.
And all in an onrush dark as autumn days
when the whole earth flattens black beneath a gale,
when Zeus flings down his pelting, punishing rains—
up in arms, furious, storming against those men
who brawl in the courts and render crooked judgments,
men who throw all rights to the winds with no regard
for the vengeful eyes of the gods—so all their rivers
crest into flood spate, ravines overflowing cut the hilltops
off into lonely islands, the roaring flood tide rolling down
to the storm-tom sea, headlong down from the foothills
washes away the good plowed work of men—
Rampaging so,
the gasping Trojan war-teams hurtled on.
Patroclus—
soon as the fighter cut their front battalions off
he swerved back to pin them against the warships,
never letting the Trojans stream back up to Troy
as they struggled madly on-but there mid-field
between the ships, the river and beetling wall
Patroclus kept on sweeping in, hacking them down,
making them pay the price for Argives slaughtered.
There, Pronous first to fall—a glint of the spear
and Patroclus tore his chest left bare by the shield-rim,
loosed his knees and the man went crashing down.
And next he went for Thestor the son of Enops
cowering, crouched in his fine polished chariot,
crazed with fear, and the reins flew from his grip—
Patroclus rising beside him stabbed his right jawbone,
ramming the spearhead square between his teeth so hard
he hooked him by that spearhead over the chariot-rail,
hoisted, dragged the Trojan out as an angler perched
on a jutting rock ledge drags some fish from the sea,
some noble catch, with line and glittering bronze hook.
So with the spear Patroclus gaffed him off his car,
his mouth gaping round the glittering point
and flipped him down facefirst,
dead as he fell, his life breath blown away.
And next he caught Erylaus closing, lunging in—
he flung a rock and it struck between his eyes
and the man's whole skull split in his heavy helmet,
down the Trojan slammed on the ground, head-down
and courage-shattering Death engulfed his corpse.
Then in a blur of kills, Amphoterus, Erymas, Epaltes,
Tlepolemus son of Damastor, and Echius and Pyris,
Ipheus and Euippus and Polymelus the son of Argeas—
he crowded corpse on corpse on the earth that rears us all.

 

  But now Sarpedon, watching his comrades drop and die,
war-shirts billowing free as Patroclus killed them,
dressed his godlike Lycians down with a harsh shout:
"Lycians, where's your pride? Where are you running?
Now be fast to attack! I'll take him on myself,
see who he is who routs us, wreaking havoc against us—
cutting the legs from under squads of good brave men."

 

  With that he leapt from his chariot fully armed
and hit the ground and Patroclus straight across,
as soon as he saw him, leapt from his car too.
As a pair of crook-clawed, hook-beaked vultures
swoop to fight, screaming above some jagged rock—
so with their battle cries they rushed each other there.
And Zeus the son of Cronus with Cronus' twisting ways,
filling with pity now to see the two great fighters,
said to Hera, his sister and his wife, "My cruel fate . . .
my Sarpedon, the mail I love- the most, my own son—
doomed to die at the hands of Menoetius' son Patroclus.
My heart is torn in two as I try to weigh all this.
Shall I pluck him up, now, while he's still alive
and set him down in the rich green land of Lycia,
far from the war at Troy and all its tears?
Or beat him down at Patroclus' hands at last?"

 

  But Queen Hera, her eyes wide, protested strongly:
"Dread majesty, son of Cronus-what are you saying?
A man, a mere mortal, his doom sealed long ago?
You'd set him free from all the pains of death?
Do as you please, Zeus . . .
but none of the deathless gods will ever praise you.
And I tell you this—take it to heart, I urge you—
if you send Sarpedon home, living still, beware!
Then surely some other god will want to sweep
his own son clear of the heavy fighting too.
Look down. Many who battle round King Priam's
mighty walls are sons of the deathless gods—
you will inspire lethal anger in them all.
No,
dear as he is to you, and your heart grieves for him,
leave Sarpedon there to die in the brutal onslaught,
beaten down at the hands of Menoetius' son Patroclus.
But once his soul and the life force have left him,
send Death to carry him home, send soothing Sleep,
all the way till they reach the broad land of Lycia.
There his brothers and countrymen will bury the prince
with full royal rites, with mounded tomb and pillar.
These are the solemn honors owed the dead."
So she pressed
and Zeus the father of men and gods complied at once.
But he showered tears of blood that drenched the earth,
showers in praise of him, his own dear son,
the man Patroclus was just about to kill
on Troy's fertile soil, far from his fatherland.

 

  Now as the two came closing on each other
Patroclus suddenly picked off Thrasymelus
the famous driver, the aide who flanked Sarpedon—
he speared him down the guts and loosed his limbs.
But Sarpedon hurled next with a flashing lance
and missed his man but he hit the horse Bold Dancer,
stabbing his right shoulder and down the stallion went,
screaming his life out, shrieking down in the dust
as his life breath winged away. And the paired horses
reared apart-a raspy creak of the yoke, the reins flying,
fouled as the trace horse thrashed the dust in death-throes.
But the fine spearman Automedon found a cure for that—
drawing his long sharp sword from his sturdy thigh
he leapt with a stroke to cut the trace horse free—
it worked. The team righted, pulled at the reins
and again both fighters closed with savage frenzy,
dueling now to the death.
  Again Sarpedon missed—
over Patroclus' left shoulder his spearhead streaked,
it never touched his body. Patroclus hurled next,
the bronze launched from his hand-no miss, a mortal hit.
He struck him right where the midriff packs the pounding heart
and down Sarpedon fell as an oak or white poplar falls
or towering pine that shipwrights up on a mountain
hew down with whetted axes for sturdy ship timber—
so he stretched in front of his team and chariot,
sprawled and roaring, clawing the bloody dust.
As the bull a marauding lion cuts from the herd,
tawny and greathearted among the shambling cattle,
dies bellowing under the lion's killing jaws—
so now Sarpedon, captain of Lycia's shieldsmen,
died at Patroclus' hands and died raging still,
crying out his beloved comrade's name: "Glaucus—
oh dear friend, dear fighter, soldier's soldier!
Now is the time to prove yourself a spearman,
a daring man of war—now, if you are brave,
make grueling battle your one consuming passion.
First find Lycia's captains, range the ranks,
spur them to fight and shield Sarpedon's body.
Then you, Glaucus, you fight for me with bronze!
You'll hang your head in shame—every day of your life—
if the Argives strip my armor here at the anchored ships
where I have gone down fighting. Hold on, full force—
spur all our men to battle!"
  Death cut him short.
The end closed in around him, swirling down his eyes,
choking off his breath. Patroclus planted a heel
against his chest, wrenched the spear from his wound
and the midriff came out with it-so he dragged out both
the man's life breath and the weapon's point together.
Close by, the Myrmidons clung to the panting stallions
straining to bolt away, free of their masters' chariot.

 

  But grief came over Glaucus, hearing his comrade's call.
His heart was racing—what could he do to help him?
Wounded himself, he gripped his right arm hard,
aching where Teucer's arrow had hit him squarely,
assaulting the Argive wall, when Teucer saved his men.
Glaucus cried a prayer to the distant deadly Archer:
"Hear me, Lord Apollo! Wherever you are now—
in Lycia's rich green country or here in Troy,
wherever on earth, you can hear a man in pain,
you have that power, and pain comes on me now.
Look at this ugly wound—
my whole arm rings with the stabbing pangs,
the blood won't clot, my shoulder's a dead weight.
I can't take up my spear, can't hold it steady—
no wading into enemy ranks to fight it out . . .
and our bravest man is dead, Sarpedon, Zeus's son—
did Zeus stand by him? Not even his own son!
I beg you, Apollo, heal this throbbing wound,
lull the pain now, lend me power in battle—
so I can rally our Lycians, drive them into war
and fight to save my comrade's corpse myself."

 

  So Glaucus prayed and Apollo heard his prayer.
He stopped the pains at once, stanched the dark blood
in his throbbing wound and filled his heart with courage.
And Glaucus sensed it all and the man glowed with joy
that the mighty god had heard his prayer so quickly.
First he hurried to spur his Lycian captains on,
ranging his own ranks, to fight around Sarpedon,
then he ran for the Trojan lines with long strides.
He found Polydamas, Panthous' son, and Prince Agenor
and reaching Aeneas and Hector helmed in bronze,
shoulder-to-shoulder let his challenge fly:
"Hector, you've wiped your allies from your mind!
And, all for you, Hector, far from their loved ones,
far from native land they bleed their lives away.
But you won't lift a hand to fight beside them.
There lies Sarpedon, lord of Lycia's shieldsmen,
who defended his realm with just decrees and power—
Ares has cut him down with Patroclus' brazen spear.
Quick, my, friends, stand by him! Cringe with shame
at the thought they'll strip his gear and maim his corpse—
these Myrmidons, seething for all the Argive troops we killed,
we speared to death against their fast trim ships!"

 

  Hard grief came sweeping over the Trojans' heads—
unbearable, irrepressible. He was their city's bastion,
always, even though he came from foreign parts,
and a mass of allies marched at his command
but he excelled them all in battle, always.
So now they went at the Argives, out for blood,
and furious for Sarpedon Hector swung them round.
But the Argives surged to Patroclus' savage spirit—
he spurred the Aeantes first, both ablaze for battle:
"Ajax, Ajax! Come—now thrill to fight as before,
brave among the brave, but now be braver still!
Their captain's down, the first to storm our wall,
the great Sarpedon. If only we could seize his body,
mutilate him, shame him, tear his gear from his back
and any comrade of his who tries to shield his corpse—
bring that enemy down with ruthless bronze!"
Urging so
but his men already burned to drive the Trojans off.
And both armies now, pulling their lines tighter,
Trojans and Lycians, Myrmidons and Achaeans
closed around the corpse to lunge in battle—
terrible war cries, stark clashing of armored men.
And across the onslaught Zeus swept murderous night
to make the pitched battle over his own dear son
a brutal, blinding struggle.
Here at the first assault
the Trojans shouldered back the fiery-eyed Achaeans—
a Myrmidon had been hit, and not their least man,
dauntless Agacles' son, renowned Epigeus . . .
He ruled Budion's fortress town in the old days
but then, having killed some highborn cousin, fled
to Peleus and glistening Thetis, begged for his own life
and they sent him off with Achilles, breaker of men,
east to stallion-country to fight and die in Troy.
He had just grasped the corpse
when shining Hector smashed his head with a rock
and his whole skull split in his massive helmet—
down he slammed on Sarpedon's body, facefirst
and courage-shattering Death engulfed his corpse.
Grief for his dead companion seized Patroclus now,
he tore through frontline fighters swift as a hawk
diving to scatter crows and fear-struck starlings—
straight at the Lycians, Patroclus 0 my rider,
straight at the pressing Trojan ranks you swooped,
enraged at your comrade's death! and struck Sthenelaus,
Ithaemenes' favorite son—a big rock to the neck
snapped the tendons strung to the skull's base.
So the front gave ground and flashing Hector too,
though only as far as a long slim spear can fly
when a man tests his hurling strength in the games
or in war when enemy fighters close to crush his life—
so far the Trojans gave as the Argives drove them back.
But Glaucus was first, lord of Lycia's shieldsmen now,
the first to turn and he killed the gallant Bathycles,
Chalcon's prize son who had made his home in Hellas,
excelling the Myrmidons all in wealth and fortune.
Now, just as the man was about to catch Glaucus
Glaucus suddenly spun and struck, he stabbed his chest,
ripped him down with a crash. A heavy blow to the Argives,
one of the brave ones down. A great joy to the Trojans,
massing packs of them swarming round the corpse
but Achaean forces never slacked their drive,
their juggernaut fury bore them breakneck on.
And there—Meriones killed a Trojan captain,
Laogonus, daring son of Onetor, priest of Zeus,
Idaean Zeus, and his land revered him like a god—
Meriones gouged him under the jaw and ear, his spirit
flew from his limbs and the hateful darkness gripped him.
Just then Aeneas hurled his brazen spear at Meriones,
hoping to hit the man as he charged behind his shield.
But he eyed Aeneas straight on, he dodged the bronze,
ducking down with a quick lunge, and behind his back
the heavy spearshaft plunged and stuck in the earth,
the butt- end quivering into the air till suddenly
rugged Ares snuffed its fury out, dead still.
The weapon shaking, planted fast in the ground,
his whole arm's power poured in a wasted shot,
Aeneas flared in anger, shouting out, "Meriones—
great dancer as you are, my spear would have stopped
your dancing days for good if only I had hit you!"

 

  The hardy spearman Meriones shot back, -Aeneas—
great man of war as you are, you'll find it hard
to quench the fire of every man who fights you.
You too are made of mortal stuff, I'd say. And I,
if I'd lanced your guts with bronze-strong as you are
and cocksure of your hands—you'd give me glory now,
you'd give your life to the famous horseman Death!"

 

  But Patroclus nerved for battle dressed him down:
"Meriones, brave as you are, why bluster on this way?
Trust me, my friend, you'll never force the Trojans
back from this corpse with a few stinging taunts—
Earth will bury many a man before that. Come—
the proof of battle is action, proof of words, debate.
No time for speeches now, it's time to fight."

 

  Breaking off, he led the way as Meriones followed,
staunch as a god. And loud as the roar goes up
when men cut timber deep in the mountain glades
and the pounding din of axes echoes miles away—
so the pound and thud of blows came rising up
from the broad earth, from the trampled paths of war
and the bronze shields and tough plied hides struck hard
as the swords and two-edged spearheads stabbed against them.
Not even a hawk-eyed scout could still make out Sarpedon,
the man's magnificent body covered over head to toe,
buried under a mass of weapons, blood and dust.
But they still kept swarming round and round the corpse
like flies in a sheepfold buzzing over the brimming pails
in the first spring days when the buckets flood with milk.
So veteran troops kept swarming round that corpse,
never pausing—nor did mighty Zeus for a moment
turn his shining eyes from the clash of battle.
He kept them fixed on the struggling mass forever,
the Father's spirit churning, thrashing out the ways,
the numberless ways to cause Patroclus' slaughter . . .
To kill him too in this present bloody rampage
over Sarpedon's splendid body? Hector in glory
cutting Patroclus down with hacking bronze
then tearing the handsome war-gear off his back?
Or let him take still more, piling up his kills?
As Zeus turned things over, that way seemed the best:
the valiant friend-in-arms of Peleus' son Achilles
would drive the Trojans and Hector helmed in bronze
back to Troy once more, killing them by platoons—
and Zeus began with Hector, he made the man a coward.
Hector leaping back in his chariot, swerving to fly,
shouted out fresh orders—"Retreat, Trojans, now!"
He knew that Zeus had tipped the scales against him.
A rout-not even the die-hard Lycians stood their ground,
they all scattered in panic, down to the last man
when they saw their royal king speared in the heart,
Sarpedon sprawled there in the muster of the dead,
for men by the squad had dropped across his corpse
once Zeus stretched tight the lethal line of battle.
So then the Achaeans ripped the armor off his back,
Sarpedon's gleaming bronze that Menoetius' son
the brave Patroclus flung in the arms of cohorts
poised to speed those trophies back to the beaked ships.
And storming Zeus was stirring up Apollo: "On with it now—
sweep Sarpedon clear of the weapons, Phoebus my friend,
and once you wipe the dark blood from his body,
bear him far from the fighting, off and away,
and bathe him well in a river's running tides
and anoint him with deathless oils . . .
dress his body in deathless, ambrosial robes.
Then send him on his way with the wind-swift escorts,
twin brothers Sleep and Death, who with all good speed
will set him down in the broad green land of Lycia.
There his brothers and countrymen will bury the prince
with full royal rites, with mounded tomb and pillar.
These are the solemn honors owed the dead."
So he decreed
and Phoebus did not neglect the Father's strong desires.
Down from Ida's slopes he dove to the bloody field
and lifting Prince Sarpedon clear of the weapons,
bore him far from the fighting, off and away,
and bathed him well in a river's running tides
and anointed him with deathless oils . . .
dressed his body in deathless, ambrosial robes
then sent him on his way with the wind-swift escorts,
twin brothers Sleep and Death, who with all good speed
set him down in Lycia's broad green land.
But Patroclus,
giving a cry to Automedon whipping on his team,
Patroclus went for Troy's and Lycia's lines,
blind in his fatal frenzy—luckless soldier.
If only he had obeyed Achilles' strict command
he might have escaped his doom, the stark night of death.
But the will of Zeus will always overpower the will of men,
Zeus who strikes fear in even the bravest man of war
and tears away his triumph, all in a lightning flash,
and at other times he will spur a man to battle,
just as he urged Patroclus' fury now.
Patroclus—
who was the first you slaughtered, who the last
when the great gods called you down to death?
First Adrestus, then Autonous, then Echeclus,
then Perimus, Megas' son, Epistor and Melanippus,
then in a flurry Elasus, Mulius and Pylartes—
he killed them all but the rest were bent on flight.

 

  And then and there the Achaeans might have taken Troy,
her towering gates toppling under Patroclus' power
heading the vanguard, storming on with his spear.
But Apollo took his stand on the massive rampart,
his mind blazing with death for him but help for Troy.
Three times Patroclus charged the jut of the high wall,
three times Apollo battered the man and hurled him back,
the god's immortal hands beating down on the gleaming shield.
Then at Patroclus' fourth assault like something superhuman,
the god shrieked down his winging words of terror: "Back—
Patroclus, Prince, go back! It is not the will of fate
that the proud Trojans' citadel fall before your spear,
not even before Achilles—far greater man than you!"

 

  And Patroclus gave ground, backing a good way off,
clear of the deadly Archer's wrath.
But now Hector,
reining his high-strung team at the Scaean Gates,
debated a moment, waiting . . .
should he drive back to the rout and soldier on?
Or call his armies now to rally within the ramparts?

 

As he turned things over, Apollo stood beside him,
taking the shape of that lusty rugged fighter
Asius, an uncle of stallion-breaking Hector,
a blood brother of Hecuba, son of Dymas
who lived in Phrygia near Sangarius' rapids.
Like him, Apollo the son of Zeus incited Hector:
"Hector, why stop fighting? Neglecting your duty!
If only I outfought you as you can outfight me,
I'd soon teach you to shirk your work in war—
you'd pay the price, I swear. Up with you—fast!
Lash those pounding stallions straight at Patroclus—
you might kill him still—Apollo might give you glory!"

 

  And back Apollo strode, a god in the wars of men
while glorious Hector ordered skilled Cebriones,
"Flog the team to battle!" Apollo pressed on,
wading into the ruck, hurling Argives back in chaos
and handing glory to Hector and all the Trojan forces.
But Hector ignored the Argive masses, killing none,
he lashed his pounding stallions straight at Patroclus.
Patroclus; over against him, leapt down from his car
and hit the ground, his left hand shaking a spear
and seized with his right a jagged, glittering stone
his hand could just cover—Patroclus flung it hard,
leaning into the heave, not backing away from Hector,
no, and no wasted shot. But he hit his driver—
a bastard son of famed King Priam, Cebriones
yanking the reins back taut-right between the eyes.
The sharp stone crushed both brows, the skull caved in
and both eyes burst from their sockets, dropping down
in the dust before his feet as the reinsman vaulted,
plunging off his well-wrought car like a diver—
Cebriones' life breath left his bones behind
and you taunted his corpse, Patroclus 0 my rider:
"Look what a springy man, a nimble, flashy tumbler!
Just think what he'd do at sea where the fish swarm—
why, the man could glut a fleet, diving for oysters!
Plunging overboard, even in choppy, heaving seas,
just as he dives to ground from his war-car now.
Even these Trojans have their tumblers—what a leap!"

 

  And he leapt himself at the fighting driver's corpse
with the rushing lunge of a lion struck in the chest
as he lays waste pens of cattle—
his own lordly courage about to be his death.
So you sprang at Cebriones, full fury, Patroclus,
as Hector sprang down from his chariot just across
and the two went tussling over the corpse as lions
up on the mountain ridges over a fresh-killed stag—
both ravenous, proud and savage—fight it out to the death.
So over the driver here and both claw-mad for battle,
Patroclus son of Menoetius, Hector ablaze for glory
strained to slash each other with ruthless bronze.
Hector seized the corpse's head, would not let go—
Patroclus clung to a foot and other fighters clashed,
Trojans, Argives, all in a grueling, maiming onset.
 

  As the East and South Winds fight in killer-squalls
deep in a mountain valley thrashing stands of timber,
oak and ash and comel with bark stretched taut and hard
and they whip their long sharp branches against each other,
a deafening roar goes up, the splintered timber crashing—
so Achaeans and Trojans crashed,
hacking into each other, and neither side now
had a thought of flight that would have meant disaster.
Showers of whetted spears stuck fast around Cebriones,
bristling winged arrows whipped from the bowstrings,
huge rocks by the salvo battering shields on shields
as they struggled round the corpse. And there he lay
in the whirling dust, overpowered in all his power
and wiped from memory all his horseman's skills.

 

  So till the sun bestrode the sky at high noon
the weapons hurtled side-to-side and men kept falling.
But once the sun wheeled past the hour for unyoking oxen,
then the Argives mounted a fiercer new attack,

 

fighting beyond their fates . . .
They dragged the hero Cebriones out from under
the pelting shafts and Trojans' piercing cries
and they tore the handsome war-gear off his back
and Patroclus charged the enemy, fired for the kill.
Three times he charged with the headlong speed of Ares,
screaming his savage cry, three times he killed nine men.
Then at the fourth assault Patroclus like something superhuman—
then, Patroclus, the end of life came blazing up before you,
yes, the lord Apollo met you there in the heart of battle,
the god, the terror! Patroclus never saw him coming,
moving across the deadly rout, shrouded in thick mist
and on he came against him and looming up behind him now—
slammed his broad shoulders and back with the god's flat hand
and his eyes spun as Apollo knocked the helmet off his head
and under his horses' hoofs it tumbled, clattering on
with its four forged horns and its hollow blank eyes
and its plumes were all smeared in the bloody dust.
Forbidden before this to defile its crest in dust,,
it guarded the head and handsome brow of a god,
a man like a god, Achilles. But now the Father
gave it over to Hector to guard his head in war
since Hector's death was closing on him quickly.
Patroclus though—the spear in his grip was shattered,
the whole of its rugged bronze-shod shadow-casting length
and his shield with straps and tassels dropped from his shoulders,
flung down on the ground-and lord Apollo the son of Zeus
wrenched his breastplate off. Disaster seized him—
his fine legs buckling—
  he stood there, senseless—
And now,
right at his back, close-up, a Dardan fighter speared him
squarely between the shoulder blades with a sharp lance.
Panthous' son Euphorbus, the best of his own age
at spears and a horseman's skill and speed of foot,
and even in this, his first, attack in chariots—
just learning the arts of war—
he'd brought down twenty drivers off their cars.
He was the first to launch a spear against you,
Patroclus 0 my rider, but did not bring you down.
Yanking out his ashen shaft from your body,
back he dashed and lost himself in the crowds—
the man would not stand up to Patroclus here
in mortal combat, stripped, defenseless as he was.
Patroclus stunned by the spear and the god's crushing blow
was weaving back to his own thronging comrades,
trying to escape death . . .
Hector waiting, watching
the greathearted Patroclus trying to stagger free,
seeing him wounded there with the sharp bronze
came rushing into him right across the lines
and rammed his spearshaft home,
stabbing deep in the bowels, and the brazen point
went jutting straight out through Patroclus' back.
Down he crashed—horror gripped the Achaean armies.
As when some lion overpowers a tireless wild boar
up on a mountain summit, battling in all their fury
over a little spring of water, both beasts craving
to slake their thirst, but the lion beats him down
with sheer brute force as the boar fights for breath—
so now with a close thrust Hector the son of Priam
tore the life from the fighting son of Menoetius,
from Patroclus who had killed so many men in war,
and gloried over him, wild winging words: "Patroclus—
surely you must have thought you'd storm my city down,
you'd wrest from the wives of Troy their day of freedom,
drag them off in ships to your own dear fatherland—
you fool! Rearing in their defense my war-team,
Hector's horses were charging out to battle,
galloping, full stretch. And I with my spear,
Hector, shining among my combat-loving comrades,
I fight away from them the fatal day—but you,
the vultures will eat your body raw!
Poor, doomed . . .
not for all his power could Achilles save you now—
and how he must have filled your ears with orders
as you went marching out and the hero stayed behind:
'Now don't come back to the hollow ships, you hear?-980
Patroclus, master horseman—
not till you've slashed the shirt around his chest
and soaked it red in the blood of man-killing Hector!'
So he must have commanded—you maniac, you obeyed."

 

Struggling for breath, you answered, Patroclus 0 my rider,
"Hector! Now is your time to glory to the skies . . .
now the victory is yours.
A gift of the son of Cronus, Zeus-Apollo too—
they brought me down with all their deathless ease,
they are the ones who tore the armor off my back.
Even if twenty Hectors had charged against me—
they'd all have died here, laid low by my spear.
No, deadly fate in league with Apollo killed me.
From the ranks of men, Euphorbus. You came third,
and all you could do was finish off my life . . .
One more thing-take it to heart, I urge you—
you too, you won't live long yourself, I. swear.
Already I see them looming up beside you-death
and the strong force of fate, to bring you down
at the hands of Aeacus' great royal son . . .
Achilles!"

 

  Death cut him short. The end closed in around him.
Flying free of his limbs
his soul went winging down to the House of Death,
wailing his fate, leaving his manhood far behind,
his young and supple strength. But glorious Hector
taunted Patroclus' body, dead as he was, "Why, Patroclus—
why prophesy my doom, my sudden death? Who knows?—
Achilles the son of sleek-haired Thetis may outrace me—
struck by my spear first—and gasp away his life!"

 

  With that he planted a heel against Patroclus' chest,
wrenched his brazen spear from the wound, kicked him over,
flat on his back, free and clear of the weapon.
At once he went for Automedon with that spear—
quick as a god, the aide of swift Achilles—
keen to cut him down but his veering horses
swept him well away-magnificent racing stallions,
gifts of the gods to Peleus, shining immortal gifts.

But Atreus' son the fighting Menelaus marked it all—
the Trojans killing Patroclus there in the brutal carnage—
and crested now in his gleaming bronze gear Atrides
plowed through the front to stand astride the body,
braced like a mother cow lowing over a calf,
her first-born, first labor-pangs she'd felt.
So the red-haired captain bestrode Patroclus now,
shielding his corpse with spear and round buckler,
burning to kill off any man who met him face-to-face.
But Euphorbus who hurled the lethal ashen spear
would not neglect his kill, Patroclus' handsome body.
Halting close beside it, he taunted fighting, Menelaus:
"Back, high and mighty Atrides, captain of armies—
back from the corpse, and leave the bloody gear!
I was the first Trojan, first of the famous allies
to spear Patroclus down in the last rough charge.
So let me seize my glory among the Trojans now—
or I'll spear you too, I'll rip your own sweet life away!"

 

  But the red-haired captain flared back in anger:
"Father Zeus—listen to this indecent, reckless bluster!
Not even the leopard's fury makes the beast so proud,
not even the lion's, not the murderous wild boar's,
the greatest pride of all, bursting the boar's chest
they're nothing next to the pride of Panthous' sons
with their strong ashen spears. But no, no joy
did even powerful Hyperenor, breaker of horses,
get from his young strength when he scorned me,
stood up to me, reviling me as the weakest fighter
in all Achaea's armies. Home he went, I'd say,
but not on his own two feet, and brought no cheer
to his loyal, loving wife and devoted parents.
And you, I'll break your courage for you too
if you try to take me on.
Go back to your own rank and file, I tell you!
Don't stand up against me—or you will meet your death.
Even a fool learns something once it hits him."
So he warned
but failed to shake Euphorbus who shot right back,
"Now, high and mighty Atrides, now by heaven
you pay in blood for the brother you laid low!
You glory over it too—making his wife a widow
lost in the depths of their new bridal chamber,
bringing his parents cursed tears and grief.
But I could stop that wretched couple's pain
if only I brought your head and bloody armor home
and laid them in Panthous' arms, in lovely Phrontis' arms!
We're wasting time. Our fight's unfought, untested—
we'll see who stands his ground, who cuts and runs."

 

  And he stabbed Menelaus' round shield, full center,
not battering through—the brazen point bent back
in the tough armor.
But his turn next, Menelaus
rose with a bronze lance and a prayer to Father Zeus
and lunging out at Euphorbus just dropping back,
pierced the pit of his throat-leaning into it hard,
his whole arm's weight in the stroke to drive it home
and the point went slicing through the tender neck.
He fell with a crash, armor ringing against his ribs,
his locks like the Graces' locks splashed with blood,
still braided tight with gold and silver clips,
pinched in like a wasp's waist. There he lay
like an olive slip a farmer rears to strength
on a lonely hilltop, drenching it down with water,
a fine young stripling tree, and the winds stir it softly,
rustling from every side, and it bursts with silver shoots-—
then suddenly out of nowhere a wind in gale force comes storming,
rips it out of its trench, stretches it out on the earth—
so Panthous' stripling son lay sprawled in death,
Euphorbus who hurled the strong ashen spear . . .
Menelaus cut him down, was stripping off his armor—

 

  Menelaus fierce as a mountain lion sure of his power,
seizing the choicest head from a good grazing herd.
First he cracks its neck, clamped in his huge jaws,
mauling the kill then down in gulps he bolts it,
blood and guts, and around him dogs and shepherds


raise a fierce din but they keep their distance,
lacking nerve to go in and take the lion on—
the fear that grips their spirit makes them blanch.
So now not a single Trojan fighter had the spine
to go and face Atrides tensing in all his strength.
Then and there Menelaus might have stripped Euphorbus
and swept the Trojan's glittering armor off with ease
if Apollo had not grudged him all that glory,
rousing Hector against him, swift as Ares.
Taking a man's shape, the Cicones' captain Mentes,
Apollo spurred him on with winged orders: "Hector—
you're chasing the wild wind, fiery Achilles' team!
They're hard for mortal men to curb and drive,
for all but Achilles-his mother is immortal.
But all the while Menelaus, Atreus' fighting son
bestrides Patroclus—he's killed the Trojans' best,
Panthous' son Euphorbus, stopped his fury cold."

 

  And back Apollo strode, a god in the wars of men.
But grief bore down on Hector, packing his dark heart
as he scanned the battle lines and saw the worst at once:
the two men there, one stripping the gleaming armor,
the other sprawled on the ground,
blood still spurting warm from his slashed throat.
Down the front he charged, crested in flashing bronze,
Hector loosing a savage cry and flaring on like fire,
like the god of fire, the blaze that never dies.
And the cry pierced Menelaus, deeply tom now
as he probed his own great heart: "What can I do?
If I leave this splendid gear and desert Patroclus—
who fell here fighting, all to redeem my honor—
won't any comrade curse me, seeing me break away?
But if I should take on Hector and Hector's Trojans
alone, in single combat-trying to save my pride—
won't they encircle me, one against so many?
This flashing Hector has all Troy at his back!
But why debate, my friend, why thrash things out?
When you fight a man against the will of the gods,
a man they have sworn to honor-then look out,
a heavy wave of ruin's about to overwhelm you.
Surely no Achaean will curse me, seeing me now,
giving ground to Hector . . .
since fighting Hector's flanked by god almighty.
Ah if only I knew where Ajax could be found,
that man with his ringing war cry—we two together
would go back to the melee calling up our fury,
even fight in the teeth of every god on high
and haul the body back to Achilles-somehow.
Things are bad, but that would be the best."

 

  Working it out, his heart racing as on they came,
waves of Trojan soldiers and Hector led them in.
And Atrides gave ground, he left the corpse
but kept on turning round to face an attack—
like a great bearded lion the dogs and field hands
drive back from the folds with spears and sharp cries
and the brave, battling heart in his chest freezes tight
and the big cat, all reluctance, pulls back from the sheds.
So the red-haired captain backed away from Patroclus' corpse
but wheeled at bay when he reached his waiting allies,
glancing round and round for Ajax' massive hulk.
All at once on the left flank he marked him,
spurring companions, urging them to fight,
for Phoebus had filled each man with quaking fear.
Atrides went on the run and reached him, shouting, "Ajax!
Hurry, my friend, this way-fight for dead Patroclus!
At least we could bring his body back to Achilles,
stripped as Patroclus is-but not Achilles' armor:
Hector with that flashing helmet has seized it all."

 

  So he roused the fury in battling Ajax' heart
and down the front he stalked with the red-haired king.
Hector, tearing the famous armor off Patroclus,
tugged hard at the corpse,
mad to hack the head from the neck with bronze
and drag the trunk away to glut the dogs of Troy.
But in charged Ajax, shield like a tower before him
and Hector, falling back on a crowd of comrades,
leapt to his chariot, flinging the burnished gear
to his waiting troops to haul away to Troy—
trophies to be his own enormous glory. But Ajax,
shielding Patroclus round with his broad buckler,
stood fast now like a lion cornered round his young
when hunters cross him, leading his cubs through woods—
he ramps in all the pride of his power, bristling strength,
the heavy folds of his forehead frowning down his eyes.
So Ajax stood his ground over brave Patroclus now—
the fighting Atrides right beside him, standing fast,
his grief mounting, every waiting moment.
But Glaucus,
Hippolochus' son and lord of Lycia's forces now,
scowled at Hector, lashing out at him: "Hector—
our prince of beauty, in battle all a sham!
That empty glory of yours a runner's glory,
a scurrying girl's at that.
Now you'd better plan how to save your city,
you alone and your native troopers born in Troy.
Now not a single Lycian goes to fight the Argives,
not to save your Troy. What lasting thanks for us,
for warring with your enemies, on and on, no end?
What hope has the common soldier in your ranks
to be saved by you, Hector, you heart of iron?—
if you could quit Sarpedon, your guest and friend-in-arms
abandoned there as carrion fit for the Argive maws.
Think what a staunch support Sarpedon was to you
and to all Troy while the man was still alive!
Now you lack the daring to save him from the dogs.
So now, if any Lycian troops will obey my orders,
home we go—and headlong death can come and topple Troy.
If the Trojans had that courage, unswerving courage
that fires men who fight for their own country,
beating their enemies down in war and struggle,
then we could drag Patroclus back to Troy at once.
If we could haul him from battle, dead as he is,
and lodge him behind King Priam's looming walls,
our enemies would release Sarpedon's gear at once
and then, then we could bring his body back to Troy.
For the man we cut down here was the loyal friend
of Prince Achilles—far the greatest among the Argive ships
and at his command go rugged fighters hand-to-hand.
But you-with enemy war cries ringing in your ears—
you lacked the nerve to go up against Great Ajax,
that fierce heart, to look him straight in the eye
and fight the man head-on—he's a better man than you!"

 

  With a dark glance from under his flashing helmet
Hector lashed back, "Glaucus, such brazen insolence
from a decent man like you, but why? Ah too bad,
and I always thought you excelled the rest in sense,
all who hale from Lycia's fertile soil. But now—
you fill me with contempt—what are you saying?
You tell me that I can't stand up to monstrous Ajax?
I tell you I never cringe at war and thundering horses!
But the will of Zeus will always overpower the will of men,
Zeus who strikes fear in even the bravest man of war
and tears away his triumph, all in a lightning flash,
and at other times he will spur a man to battle.
Come on, my friend, stand by me, watch me work!
See if I prove a coward dawn to dusk-your claim—
or I stop some Argive, blazing in all his power,
from fighting on to shield Patroclus' corpse!"

 

  With that he loosed a shrill cry to his Trojans,
"Trojans! Lycians! Dardan fighters hand-to-hand—
now be men, my friends, call up your battle-fury!
I'll strap on the brave Achilles' armor, burnished armor
I stripped from strong Patroclus when I killed him!"

 

  So he cried and his own bronze helmet flashed
as Hector veered away from the heavy fighting,
running after his men and caught them quickly.
They'd not gone far and he ran with eager strides
as they bore Achilles' famous arms toward Troy.
Standing far from the war and all its heartbreak
Hector exchanged his armor, handing his own gear
to his battle-hungry troops to return to holy Troy,
and donned the deathless arms of Peleus' son Achilles,
arms the gods of the sky once gave his loving father—
and Peleus passed them on to his son when he grew old
but the son would not grow old in his father's armor.
Now,
when Zeus who arrays the clouds saw Hector from afar,
strapping on the gear of Peleus' godlike son,
he shook his head and addressed his own deep heart:
"Poor soldier. Never a thought of death weighs down
your spirit now, yet death is right beside you . . .
You don the deathless arms of a great fighter—
and all other fighters tremble before him, true,
but you, you killed his comrade, gentle, strong,
and against all rights you ripped the immortal armor
off his head and shoulders. So great power for the moment
I will grant you to compensate for all that is to come:
never again will you return from battle, Hector,
nor will Andromache take that famous armor,
Achilles' deathless armor, from your hands."
So he decreed
and the son of Cronus bowed his craggy dark brows.
Zeus fitted the armor tightly on Hector's body
and Ares surged in his heart with awesome force,
filling his limbs with power and fighting strength.
And on he strode amidst his illustrious Trojan allies—
calling out with wild cries, now flashing before them all
in the gleaming battle-gear of greathearted Achilles.
He ranged their ranks, inspiriting every captain,
commanding Mesthles, Glaucus, Medon, Thersilochus,
Asteropaeus, Disenor, Hippothous, Phorcys, Chromius,
Ennomus too, who could read the flight of birds.
Hector drove them on with winging orders: "Hear me—
numberless tribes of allies living round our borders—
I neither sought nor needed enormous hordes of men
that day I called you here, each from your own city.
What I needed was men to shield our helpless children,
fighting men to defend our Trojan women-all-out—
against these savage Argives. That goal in mind,
I bleed my own people for gifts and food
so I can build your courage, each and every man.
So now, each of you, turn straight for the enemy,
live or die-that is the lovely give-and-take of war.
That man who drags Patroclus back to Trojan charioteers,
dead as Patroclus is, and makes Great Ajax yield—
to him I will give one half the bloody spoils,
keep half for myself—his glory will equal mine!"
Strong vow—
and they bore straight down on the Argives full force,
shaking their spears, their hearts fired with hopes
of dragging Patroclus' body out from under Ajax—
fools! Over the corpse he'd cut down crowds of men,
though now, at this point, Ajax warned Menelaus,
lord of the battle cry, "Old friend, my Prince,
I lose hope that we alone, on our own power,
can make it back from the fighting.
I not only fear for our comrade's body—
Patroclus will glut the dogs and birds of Troy
and all too soon—but I fear for my own head,
for my own life. And yours too, Menelaus—
look at this cloud of war that blots out all the field,
this Hector, this headlong death that stares us in the face!
Quick, call to the chiefs—if one can hear you now."

 

  At that the prince of the battle cry complied
with a high piercing shout that reached all troops:
"Friends-lords of the Argives, 0 my captains!
All who join the Atridae, Agamemnon and Menelaus,
who drink wine at the king's expense and hold command
of your own troops, your rank and fame from Zeus!
Impossible now to pick you out, my captains,
man by man—the battle blazes up so wildly.
Forward, each on his own! You'll die of shame
if the dogs of Ilium make Patroclus ripping sport."

 

  And the quick Oilean Ajax heard him clearly,
first on the run along the fighting front to meet him—
Idomeneus after him and Idomeneus' good aide,
Meriones, a match for the butcher god of war.
For the rest who followed, waking Achaea's war-lust,
what man has spirit strong enough to sing their names?

 

  Down in a mass the Trojans pounded—Hector led them in,
charging in as a heavy surf roars in aeainst the rio
at a river's mouth, swelled with rains from Zeus,
and on either side the jutting headlands bellow back
at the booming sea with matching thunder—in they came,
the Trojans roaring in. But the Argives faced them,
standing fast in a ring around Patroclus, one fury
seizing their hearts, packing a wall of bronze shields
and round about their glittering crested helmets now
the son of Cronus spread a dense, deepening mist.
He had never hated Menoetius' son in the past,
while he was alive and still Achilles' aide,
and now the Father loathed to see him prey
to Troy's marauders, the ravening dogs of Troy—
so he drove his comrades on to shield his corpse.

 

  At first the Trojans could ram the Argives back
and they abandoned the corpse, their fiery-eyed battalions
fled away in panic. But still the breakneck Trojans,
up in arms as they were,
killed off none of the Argives with their spears—
instead they began to drag away Patroclus' corpse.
But not for long would his comrades give him up:
in a swift maneuver Ajax wheeled them round,
Ajax, greatest in build, greatest in works of war
of all the Argives after Peleus' matchless son.
Right through the front he plowed like a wild boar
ramping in power up on the high mountain ridges,
scattering dogs and reckless hunters at one charge
when he wheels at bay and drives them down the glades.
So now the son of noble Telamon, dauntless Ajax
scattered the massing Trojan packs at a charge,
all who bestrode Patroclus now, high with hopes
of dragging him back to Troy to win the glory—
Trying hardest,
Hippothous out for fame . . . Pelasgian Lethus' son,
lashing a shield-strap round the ankle tendons,
was hauling Patroclus footfirst through the melee,
hoping to please Prince Hector and all the Trojans,
Hippothous rushing on but death came just as fast.
No Trojans could save him now, strain as they might
Ajax son of Telamon charging quickly into the carnage
speared him at close range through the bronze-cheeked helmet,
the horsehair crest cracked wide open around the point,
smashed by the massive spear and hand that drove it.
His brains burst from the wound in sprays of blood,
soaking the weapon's socket—
his strength dissolved on the spot, his grip loosed
and he dropped the foot of brave Patroclus' corpse.
There on the ground it lay-he rushed to join it,
pitching over the dead man's body face-to-face,
a world away from Larissa's dark rich soil . . .
Never would he repay his loving parents now
for the gift of rearing—his life cut short so soon,
brought down by the spear of lionhearted Ajax. .

 

  Hector hurled at him—a sudden glint of the spear—
but Ajax saw it coming and dodged the bronze shaft,
just by a hair, and the weapon caught Schedius,
gallant Iphitus' son and Phocia's finest man,
who made his home in the famous town of Panopeus,
ruling tribes of men. Hector speared him now—
the point split the collarbone, slashing through
and out by the shoulder's base, sticking out the back.
He fell with a crash, his armor clanging round him.
Ajax next—
with a lunge he stabbed Phorcys, Phaenops' warrior son
bestriding Hippothous' corpse—he ripped his belly,
smashing the corslet just where the plates join
and the bronze spearhead spilled his entrails out
and down went Phorcys, grasping, clawing the dust.
The Trojan front gave ground, glorious Hector too
and the Argives yelled wildly, dragging the bodies,
hauling Hippothous' corpse along with Phorcys' now
and tearing the bloody armor off their backs.
Then, once more,
Trojan troops would have clambered back inside 'their walls,
whipped weak with fear by the Argives primed for battle
and they, they would have seized enormous glory—
yes, defying even the great decree of Zeus—
by dint of their own power and striking force.
But god Apollo himself spurred on Aeneas,
taking the build of Periphas, Summoner's son
who had grown old as, herald to Aeneas' father
the aged king—a loving, loyal herald too . . . .
Like him to the life, Apollo provoked Aeneas:
"Aeneas—how could you and your men save Troy
with the gods against you? As I've seen other men
who trust to their own power and striking force,
their own valor, their own troop-strength—
even badly outmanned—defend their country well.
But Zeus is with us here! Decreeing triumph for us,
not for the Argives now. But you, you're all frightened
out of your minds—you cannot fight."
The deadly Archer—
Aeneas knew him at once, looking straight in his eyes
and the fighter loosed a rousing shout at Hector:
"Hector—all you captains of Trojans, Trojan allies—
shame, what shame! Clambering back into Troy now,
whipped weak with fear by the Argive forces? Look—
one of the gods comes up beside me, tells me Zeus
the supreme commander still impels us all in battle.
So go for the Argives—head-on! Don't let them bear
Patroclus' body back to their ships without a fight!"

 

  And springing out of the lines Aeneas took his stand
as the rest swung round and braced to meet the Argives.
There—Aeneas lunged and speared Leocritus through,
a son of Arisbas, Lycomedes' die-hard friend.
And veteran Lycomedes pitied him as he dropped,
sweeping beside him, rearing—a flash of his lance
and he hit a captain, Hippasus' son Apisaon,
slitting open his liver, up under the midriff . . .
His knees went limp, a man who'd marched from Paeonia,
good fertile soil where he excelled all fighters,
all but Asteropaeus—

 

Down to the ground he went
but battling Asteropaeus pitied his comrade's pain
and charged the Argives hard, mad to fight it out—
no use, too late. They'd packed behind their shields,
ringing Patroclus round on all sides, spears jutting
as Ajax ranged them all and shouted out commands:
"No one back away from the body! No heroes either,
bolting out of the Argive pack for single combat!
Cluster round Patroclus, shoulder-to-shoulder,
fight them at close range!" At the giant's command
the earth ran red with blood, slithering dark now
and the soldiers' corpses tumbling thick-and-fast,
Trojans and breakneck allies-piled alongside Argives—
how could the Argives fight without some bloody losses?
But far fewer of them went down, remembering always
to fight in tight formation,
friend defending friend from headlong slaughter.

 

So on they fought like a swirl of living fire—
you could not say if the sun and moon still stood secure,
so dense the battle-haze that engulfed the brave
who stood their ground around Patroclus' body.
But the other Trojans and Argive men-at-arms
fought on at their ease beneath a clear blue sky—
sharp brilliance of sunlight glittering round them,
not a cloud in sight to shadow the earth and mountains.
Men who fought at a distance worked with frequent breaks,
dodging painful arrows that showered side-to-side.
But men who held the center suffered agonies,
thanks to the haze and carnage—
ruthless bronze hacking their lines to pieces,
there where the bravest fought. Yet two men there,
famous fighters, Antilochus flanking Thrasymedes
still had not caught word of Patroclus' death:
they thought the gallant soldier still alive,
fighting Trojans up on the clashing front lines.
But the two men kept their lookout, always alert
to their comrades' deaths or signs of instant flight
as the two fought out on the flank—just as Nestor ordered,
sending both sons forth from the black ships to battle.

 

  So all day long for the men of war the fighting raged,
grim and grueling, relentless, drenching labor, nonstop,
and the knees, shins and feet that upheld each fighter,
their hands, their eyes, ran with the sweat of struggle
over the great runner Achilles' steadfast aide-in-arms—
an enormous tug-of-war. As when some master tanner
gives his crews the hide of a huge bull for stretching,
the beast's skin soaked in grease and the men grab hold,
bracing round in a broad circle, tugging, stretching hard
till the skin's oils go dripping out as the grease sinks in,
so many workers stretch the whole hide tough and taut—
so back and forth in a cramped space they tugged,
both sides dragging the corpse and hopes rising,
Trojans hoping to drag Patroclus back to Troy,
Achaeans to drag him back to the hollow ships
and round him always the brutal struggle raging.
Not even Ares, lasher of armies, not even Athena
watching the battle here could scorn its fury,
not even in their most savage lust for combat, no—
so tense the work of war for the men and chariot-teams
that Zeus stretched taut across Patroclus this one day . . .

 

  But great Achilles knew nothing yet of Patroclus' death.
They were fighting far afield of the deep-sea ships,
beneath the Trojan wall, so Achilles never feared
his friend was dead—he must be still alive,
pressing on to the very gates, but he'd come back.
Achilles never dreamed Patroclus would storm all Troy
without him, not even with him. No, time and again
his mother Thetis told him this was not to be,
she told him alone, in secret . . .
always bringing word of mighty Zeus's plans,
but not this time. One thing she never told him—
his own mother—what a terrible thing had taken place:
his dearest friend-in-arms on earth lay dead.
Over his corpse
no letup, the fighters kept on thrusting whetted spears,
locked in endless struggle, cutting each other down.
And an Argive armed in bronze would call out, "Friends!
Our glory's gone if we fall back now on the ships—
let the black earth gape and take us all at once,
here and now! Better for us that way, by far,
if we yield his corpse to the stallion-breaking Trojans,
all to drag him back to Troy and win the glory."

 

  And a hardy Trojan would call on his side, "Friends!
What if it's fated for us to die beside this body—
all dead in a mass? Let no man quit the battle!"

 

  So they would say, fuelingg comrades' courage.
And so they fought and the iron din went rising up
to the bronze sky through the barren breathless air.
But standing clear of the fray Achilles' horses wept
from the time they first had sensed their driver's death,
brought down in the dust by man-killing Hector.
Diores' rugged son Automedon did his best,
lashed them over and over with stinging whip—
coaxing them gently now, now shouting oath on oath.
But both balked at returning now to the ships
moored at the Hellespont's far-reaching shore
or galloping back to fight beside the Argives.
Staunch as a pillar planted tall above a barrow,
standing sentry over some lord or lady's grave-site,
so they stood, holding the blazoned chariot stock-still,
their heads trailing along the ground, warm tears flowing
down from their eyes to wet the earth . . . the horses mourned,
longing now for their driver, their luxurious manes soiled,
streaming down from the yoke-pads, down along the yoke.

 

  And Zeus pitied them, watching their tears flow.
He shook his head and addressed his own deep heart:
"Poor creatures, why did we give you to King Peleus,
a mortal doomed to death . . .
you immortal beasts who never age or die?
So you could suffer the pains of wretched men?
There is nothing alive more agonized than man
of all that breathe and crawl across the earth.
But Hector, at least, will never ride behind you,
you and your blazoned chariot. I will never permit it.
What more does he want? The arms are enough for him—
Priam's son with his empty, futile boasting.
But I will fill your legs and hearts with strength
so you can save Automedon, bear him from the fighting
back to the fleet. For still I will give the Trojans glory—
killing all the way to the benched ships till the sun sinks
and the blessed darkness sweeps across the earth."

 

  And with that he breathed fresh fire in the team.
They shook the dust from their manes and galloped off,
speeding the fast chariot just where the armies clashed.
Automedon fought as he rode, though grieving for his friend,
swooping in with the team like a vulture after geese.
Now he'd veer from the Trojan melee in a flash
then dart back in a charge, pursuing mobs of men
but he could not kill the ones he rushed in force—
no way for him now, alone in the hurtling car,
to lunge with a spear and still control those racers.
But at last a cohort marked the driver's straits,
Alcimedon the son of Laerces, Haemon's grandson
coming behind the chariot, shouted out, 'Automedon)
What god has put such a tactic in your head?
It's good-for-nothing—he's torn your wits away.
Taking the Trojans on alone, on the front lines
but your comrade's dead, look, and Hector himself,
strapped in Achilles' armor, swaggers on in glory!"

 

  Diores' son Automedon shouted back, "Alcimedon!
What other Achaean driver could match your skill
at curbing this deathless team or spurring on their fury?
Only Patroclus, skilled as the gods themselves
while the man was still alive—
now death and fate have got him in their grip.
On with it! Take up the whip and shining reins,
I'll dismount the car and fight on foot."

 

  Alcimedon sprang aboard the hurtling chariot,
quickly grasping the whip and reins in both fists
as Automedon leapt to ground. But Hector saw them
and called at once to Aeneas posted close beside him,
"Aeneas, counselor of the Trojans armed in bronze,
I can see the great runner Achilles' team—look there—
heading into the fight but reined by feeble drivers.
So my hopes ride high that we can seize them now
if you have the heart to join me.
Charge! Those two will flinch, they'd never dare
stand up to us man-to-man in all-out battle!"

 

  And Anchises' gallant son did not resist.
They went straight on, shoulders shielded in oxhide
tanned and tough and hammered thick with bronze.
And a brace of fighters, Chromius, strong Aretus
flanked their attack and the Trojans had high hopes
of killing the men and driving off the massive stallions.
Reckless fools! They'd never disengage from Automedon,
not without some bloodshed. No, with a prayer to Zeus
some new fighting power had filled his dark heart
and he quickly called his trusted friend Alcimedon:
"Alcimedon, keep those horses close beside me,
breathing down my neck. Nothing can hold him back,
this Hector in all his fury—nothing, I tell you—
not till he leaps behind Achilles' long-maned team
and kills us both and routs our forward line—
or he goes down himself in the first assault."

 

And he called the two Aeantes and Menelaus:
"Ajax, Ajax—lords of the Argives—Menelaus!
Leave Patroclus now to the best men you can find,
they'll straddle the corpse and fight off Trojan packs—
you fight the fatal day from us, we're still alive.
Here they come, full tilt, Aeneas and Hector,
Troy's best men, bearing down on us here—
this point of tears and attack!
But all lies in the lap of the great gods.
I'll fling a spear myself and leave the rest to Zeus."

 

He aimed and hurled and his spear's long shadow flew
and hit Aretus square in the balanced round shield—
no blocking the shaft, the bronze rammed through,
piercing his belt and gouging down his belly.
As a burly farmhand wielding a whetted ax,
chopping a field-ranging bull behind the horns,
hacks through its whole hump and the beast heaves up
then topples forward—so Aretus reared, heaving up
then toppled down on his back. The slashing spear
shuddered tense in his guts and the man was gone.
A flash of a lance—Hector hurled at Automedon
who kept his eyes right on him, dodged the bronze,
ducking down with a quick lunge, and behind his back
the heavy spearshaft plunged and stuck in the earth,
the butt end quivering into the air till suddenly
rugged Ares snuffed its fury out, dead still . . .
Now they would have attacked with swords, close-up,
incensed, but the two Aeantes drove a wedge between them,
plowing through the press at their comrade's call.
Cowering backward fast the Trojans gave ground,
Hector, Aeneas and Chromius, noble prince,
deserted Aretus there, his life tom out,
sprawled on the spot. Automedon rushed in,
wild as the god of war to strip the armor off,
shouting in savage exultation, "Now, by heaven,
I've eased the grief of Patroclus' ghost a little—
though the man I battered down was half as great as he!"

 

  With that he tossed the bloody gear in the chariot,
climbed aboard with his hands and feet dripping gore
like a lion that rends and bolts a bull.
And now, again,
the fight for Patroclus flared, stretched to the breaking point,
mounting in tears, in fury, since Pallas fired their blood,
sweeping down from the heavens, sent by the Father
thundering far and wide to drive the Argives on,
for now his mind had changed, at least for a moment.
Yes, down like a lurid rainbow Zeus sends arching
down to mortal men from the high skies, a sign of war
or blizzard to freeze the summer's warmth and put a halt
to men's work on the face of the earth and harry flocks—
so shrouded round in a lurid cloud came Pallas now
and dove in the Argive ranks to fire up each man.
And the first one she roused was Atreus' son
powerful Menelaus—he stood right at hand—
she took the build and tireless voice of Phoenix:
"Yours is the shame, Atrides. You will hang your head
if under the walls of Troy the dogs in all their frenzy
drag and maul the proud Achilles' steadfast friend.
Hold on, full force—spur all our men to battle!"

 

  The lord of the war cry told the goddess quickly,
"Phoenix, father, good old soldier-if only Pallas
would give me power and drive the weapons off mel
Then I'd gladly stand and fight for Patroclus.
My comrade's death has cut me to the quick.
But Hector keeps his terrible fury blazing,
keeps his bronze spear stabbing
and never stops the slaughter—Zeus hands him glory!"

 

  Her gray eyes afire, the goddess Pallas thrilled
that the man had prayed to her before all other gods.
She put fresh strength in his back, spring in his knees
and filled his heart with the horsefly's raw daring—
brush it away from a man's flesh and back it comes,
biting, attacking, crazed for sweet human blood.
With such raw daring she filled his dark heart
and he bestrode Patroclus, flung a gleaming spear—
and there was a Trojan, Eetion's son called Podes,
well-bred, wealthy, and Hector prized him most
in all the realm-a first-rate drinking friend . . .
As he sprang in flight the red-haired captain hit him,
splitting his belt, and bronze went ripping through his flesh
and down he went with a crash. Atrides hauled his corpse
from under the Trojans toward his own massing friends.

 

  But Hector—Apollo stood by him and drove him on,
disguised as Phaenops, Asius' son Abydos-bom,
dearest to Hector of all his foreign guests.
Like him to the life, the deadly Archer taunted,
"Hector, what Achaean will ever fear you now?
Look how you cringe in the face of Menelaus,
no great fighter before this—a weakling, soft.
He's gone and snatched a corpse from under our noses,
single-handed he's taken down your trusted comrade
brave in the front ranks, Podes, Eetion's son."

 

  A black cloud of grief came shrouding over Hector
but helmed in flashing bronze he hurtled through the front.
That very moment the son of Cronul; seized his storm-shield—
rippling and flaring bright—and shrouding Ida in dark clouds,
loosed a bolt with a huge crack of thunder, shook the shield,
gave the Trojans triumph and routed fear-struck Argives.

 

And the first to beat retreat, a Boeotian, Peneleos.
Charging forward as always, head-on, until Polydamas
speared his shoulder—just grazing its ridge
but grating bone—he thrust at point-blank range.
Close range too, Hector stabbed the wrist of Leitus,
brave Alectryon's son, and knocked him out of action.
No hope left he could wield a spear against the Trojans,
no more fighting now—Leitus looked around and ran.
But as Hector rushed him, Idomeneus speared Hector,
struck the plate on his chest beside the nipple—
his long spearshaft splintered off at the head
and the Trojans shouted out. And Hector hurled
at Idomeneus now aboard a chariot-missed by a hair
but he caught Meriones' aide and driver Coeranus,
one who'd come with his lord from rock-built Lyctus.
Idomeneus had left the ships on foot that morning
and would have offered the Trojans a fine triumph now
if Coeranus had not rushed to the rescue, lashed his team
and come like light to the king—
  he saved his life that day
but he quickly lost his own to man-killing Hector—
Hector
speared him under the jaw and ear, knocking teeth out,
shattering roots and all and split his tongue in half.
He pitched from his car, the reins poured to the ground
and on foot Meriones grabbed them up in his hands,
shouting out at Idomeneus, "Whip them hard nowl
Back to the fast ships! You see for yourself—
no power left in the Argives."
So Meriones yelled
and Idomeneus whipped the team with their manes streaming,
back to the hollow ships—fear seized the king at last.

 

  Lionhearted Ajax and Menelaus were not blind . . .
they saw Zeus turn the tide toward the Trojans.
Telamonian Ajax voiced frustration first:
"Dear god, enough! Any idiot boy could see
how Father Zeus himself supports these Trojans.
All their weapons land, no matter who flings them,
brave fighter or bad-Zeus guides them all to the mark.
Ours all clatter to ground. Wasted, harmless shots.
So come, alone as we are, find the best way out:
how do we pull the body clear and save ourselves,
make it back to our lines and bring our friends some joy?
They look our way in despair, they must. All hope gone
that murderous Hector's rage and invincible spear-arm
can be stopped—not now—
he'll hurl himself against our blackened hullsl
If only an aide could speed the word to Achilles.
I'm certain he has not heard the dreadful news
that his dear friend lies dead. Wherever I look,
no use, I cannot see the Achaean for the mission,
such swirling mist blots out the men and horses both.
O Father Zeus—draw our armies clear of the cloud,
give us a bright sky, give us back our sight!
Kill us all in the light of day at least—
since killing's now your pleasure!"
So he prayed
and the Father filled with pity, seeing Ajax weep.
He dispelled the mist at once,
drove off the cloud and the sun came blazing forth
and the whole war swung into view, clear, that instant—
and Ajax called the lord of the war cry, Menelaus:
"Look hard for Antilochus now, my royal friend.
If you see him still alive, brave Nestor's son,
tell him to run the news to great Achilles quickly—
his dearest friend-in-arms on earth lies dead."

 

  And the lord of the battle cry could not refuse
but dragged his heels like a lion leaving sheepfolds,
bone-weary from harrying hounds and field hands.
They'll never let him tear the rich fat from the oxen,
all night long they stand their guard but the lion craves meat,
he lunges in and in but his charges gain him nothing,
thick-and-fast from their hardy hands the javelins
rain down in his face, and waves of roaring torches-—
these the big cat fears, balking for all his rage,
and at dawn he slinks away, his spirits dashed.
And so the lord of the war cry left Patroclus,
resisting all the way—he feared the worst:
stampeded in terror, his men would leave the body
easy prey for the Trojans. So here Menelaus paused
with much to command Meriones and the Aeantes:
"Ajax and Ajax, captains of Achaea, Meriones too,
remember Patroclus now, our stricken comrade!
That gentle man, the soul of kindness to all
while the man was still alive . . .
Now death and fate have got him in their grip."

 

  And with that the red-haired captain moved ahead
like an eagle scanning left and right, the bird men say
has the sharpest eyes of all that fly the heavens:
high as he soars he'll never miss the racing hare
cowering down low in the dense, shaggy brush—
down on its head he swoops
and pins it fast and rips its life away. So now,
Menelaus 0 my King, you turned your shining eyes,
scanning the crowds of comrades front and rear,
trying to see if Nestor's son was still alive.
He marked him quickly, out on the left flank
and rousing cohorts, driving them back to war,
and the red-haired captain halted near and called,
"Turn this way, Antilochus, Prince, and hear the news,
dreadful news-would to god it had never happened!
You see for yourself, I know, how Father Zeus
sends waves of ruin breaking down our lines—
victory goes to Troy. Our best Achaean's dead—
Patroclus, a stunning loss to all our armies!
Quick, run to Achilles' moorings up the beach
and tell him all. Perhaps-but he must be fast—
he can bring the body safely back to his ship,
stripped as Patroclus is—
Hector with that flashing helmet has his armor."

 

  Antilochus listened closely, hating every word.
He stood there speechless a while, struck dumb ...
tears filling his eyes, his strong voice choked.
But he still would not neglect Atrides' order.
So handing his gear to a loyal aide Laodocus,
who maneuvered his pawing horses close by,
he set off at a run.
But he wept freely now
as his feet swept him clear of the close fighting,
bearing the dreadful news to Peleus' son Achilles.
But you, Menelaus 0 my King, you had no heart
to defend the Pylians, hard-pressed as they were,
once their leader left, a heavy blow to his troops.
And putting the veteran Thrasymedes in command,
he ran back to bestride Patroclus' corpse again
and flanking the two Aeantes now, reported briskly,
"I sent Antilochus. He's off to the fast ships
to tell the swift Achilles. But I've little hope
he'll come at all—for all his rage at Hector.
How can he fight the Trojans without armor?
So come, alone as we are, find the best way out:
how do we pull the body clear and save ourselves
from the Trojan uproar, flee our death, our fate?"

 

  The Great Telamonian Ajax answered firmly,
"All true, straight to the point, Lord Menelaus.
Quickly, you and Meriones shoulder up the body,
carry it off the lines. We're right behind you,
fighting the Trojans, fighting this Prince Hector.
The two Aeantes bearing the same fury, the same name—
and no strangers at standing up to slashing Ares,
each defending the other side-by-side."
So he urged
and up from the earth they caught the body in their arms,
hoisting it high above their heads with a great heave—
and Trojan forces crowding behind them shouted out
when they saw the Argive fighters lift the corpse.
They swept in like hounds that fling themselves
at a wounded boar before young hunters reach him,
darting in for a moment, keen to rip the boar apart
till he wheels at bay, ramping into the pack with all his power
and the hounds cringe and bolt and scatter left and right.
And so the Trojans kept on pressing, squad on squad,
stabbing away with swords and two-edged spears
till the two called Ajax wheeled against them hard
to make a stand—and they turned white, none had nerve
to charge forth now and fight it out for the corpse.

 

  So they labored to haul Patroclus from the war,
back to the beaked ships as fighting flared behind them
wild as a flash fire, sprung out of nowhere, storming down
on a teeming city, houses caving in to the big blaze
as gale-winds whip it into a roaring conflagration.
So rose the relentless din of horse and fighting men
breaking against them now as they struggled back to shore.
Dead set as mules who put their backs in the labor . . .
dragging down from the cliffs along a stony trail
some roof-beam or a heavy ship timber, slogging on
till they nearly burst their hearts with sweat and labor—
so they strained to carry off the corpse. Right behind them
the two Aeantes held the Trojans off as a wooded rocky ridge
stretched out across an entire plain holds back a flood,
fighting off the killer-tides of the mounting rivers,
beating them all back to swamp the lowland flats—
none of their pounding waves can make a breakthrough.
So the two Aeantes kept on beating the Trojans off
but on they came, assaulting the rear, two in the lead,
Aeneas the son of Anchises flanking glorious Hector.
Flying before them now like clouds of crows or starlings
screaming murder, seeing a falcon dive in for the kill,
the hawk that wings grim death at smaller birds—
so pursued by Aeneas and Hector Argive fighters
raced, screaming death-cries, lust for battle lost
and masses of fine armor littered both sides of the trench
as the Argives fled in fear, no halt in the fighting, not now—

So the men fought on like a mass of whirling fire
as swift Antilochus raced the message toward Achilles.
Sheltered under his curving, beaked ships he found him,
foreboding, deep down, all that had come to pass.
Agonizing now he probed his own great heart:
"Why, why? Our long-haired Achaeans routed again,
driven in terror off the plain to crowd the ships, but why?
Dear gods, don't bring to pass the grief that haunts my heart—
the prophecy that mother revealed to me one time . . .
she said the best of the Myrmidons—while I lived—
would fall at Trojan hands and leave the light of day.
And now he's dead, I know it. Menoetius' gallant son,
my headstrong friend! And I told Patroclus clearly,
'Once you have beaten off the lethal fire, quick,


come back to the ships-you must not battle Hector!' "

 

  As such fears went churning through his mind
the warlord Nestor's son drew near him now,
streaming warm tears, to give the dreaded message:
"Ah son of royal Peleus, what you must hear from me!
What painful news—would to god it had never happened!
Patroclus has fallen. They're fighting over his corpse.
He's stripped, naked—Hector with that flashing helmet,
Hector has your arms!"
  So the captain reported.
A black cloud of grief came shrouding over Achilles.
Both hands clawing the ground for soot and filth,
he poured it over his head, fouled his handsome face
and black ashes settled onto his fresh clean war-shirt.
Overpowered in all his power, sprawled in the dust,
Achilles lay there, fallen . . .
tearing his hair, defiling it with his own hands.
And the women he and Patroclus carried off as captives
caught the grief in their hearts and keened and wailed,
out of the tents they ran to ring the great Achilles,
all of them beat their breasts with clenched fists,
sank to the ground, each woman's knees gave way.
Antilochus kneeling near, weeping uncontrollably,
clutched Achilles' hands as he wept his proud heart out—
for fear he would slash his throat with an iron blade.
Achilles suddenly loosed a terrible, wrenching cry
and his noble mother heard him, seated near her father,
the Old Man of the Sea in the salt green depths,
and she cried out in turn. And immortal sea-nymphs
gathered round their sister, all the Nereids dwelling
down the sounding depths, they all came rushing now—
Glitter, blossoming Spray and the swells' Embrace,
Fair-Isle and shadowy Cavern, Mist and Spindrift,
ocean nymphs of the glances pooling deep and dark,
Race-with-the-Waves and Headlands' Hope and Safe Haven,
Glimmer of Honey, Suave-and-Soothing, Whirlpool, Brilliance,
Bounty and First Light and Speeder of Ships and buoyant Power,
Welcome Home and Bather of Meadows and Master's Lovely Consort,
Gift of the Sea, Eyes of the World and the famous milk-white Calm
and Truth and Never-Wrong and the queen who rules the tides in beauty
and in rushed Glory and Healer of Men and the one who rescues kings
and Sparkler, Down-from-the-Cliffs, sleek-haired Strands of Sand
and all the rest of the Nereids dwelling down the depths.
The silver cave was shimmering full of sea-nymphs,
all in one mounting chorus beating their breasts
as Thetis launched the dirge: "Hear me, sisters,
daughters of Nereus, so you all will know it well—
listen to all the sorrows welling in my heart!
I am agony—
mother of grief and greatness—O my child!
Yes, I gave birth to a flawless, mighty son . . .
the splendor of heroes, and he shot up like a young branch,
like a fine tree I reared him-the orchard's crowning glory—
but only to send him off in the beaked ships to Troy
to battle Trojans! Never again will I embrace him
striding home through the doors of Peleus' house.
And long as- I have him with me, still alive,
looking into the sunlight, he is racked with anguish.
And I, I go to his side—nothing I do can help him.
Nothing. But go I shall, to see my darling boy,
to hear what grief has come to break his heart
while he holds back from battle."
So Thetis cried
as she left the cave and her sisters swam up with her,
all in a tide of tears, and billowing round them now
the ground swell heaved open. And once they reached
the fertile land of Troy they all streamed ashore,
row on row in a long cortege, the sea-nymphs
filing up where the Myrmidon ships lay hauled,
clustered closely round the great runner Achilles ...
As he groaned from the depths his mother rose before him
and sobbing a sharp cry, cradled her son's head in her hands
and her words were all compassion, winging pity: "My child—
why in tears? What sorrow has touched your heart?
Tell me, please. Don't harbor it deep inside you.
Zeus has accomplished everything you wanted,
just as you raised your hands and prayed that day.
All the sons of Achaea are pinned against the ships
and all for want of you-they suffer shattering losses."

 

  And groaning deeply the matchless runner answered,
"O dear mother, true! All those burning desires
Olympian Zeus has brought to pass for me—
but what joy to me now? My dear comrade's dead—
Patroclus—the man I loved beyond all other comrades,


loved as my own life—I've lost him—Hector's killed him,
stripped the gigantic armor off his back, a marvel to behold—
my burnished gear! Radiant gifts the gods presented Peleus
that day they drove you into a mortal's marriage bed ...
I wish you'd lingered deep with the deathless sea-nymphs,
lived at ease, and Peleus carried home a mortal bride.
But now, as it is, sorrows, unending sorrows must surge
within your heart as well—for your own son's death.
Never again will you embrace him striding home.
My spirit rebels—I've lost the will to live,
to take my stand in the world of men-unless,
before all else, Hector's battered down by my spear
and gasps away his life, the blood-price for Patroclus,
Menoetius' gallant son he's killed and stripped!"

 

  But Thetis answered, warning through her tears,
"You're doomed to a short life, my son, from all you say!
For hard on the heels of Hector's death your death
must come at once—"
"Then let me die at once"—
Achilles burst out, despairing-"since it was not my fate
to save my dearest comrade from his death! Look,
a world away from his fatherland he's perished,
lacking me, my fighting strength, to defend him.
But now, since I shall not return to my fatherland . . .
nor did I bring one ray of hope to my Patroclus,
nor to the rest of all my steadfast comrades,
countless ranks struck down by mighty Hector—
No, no, here I sit by the ships . . .
a useless, dead weight on the good green earth
I, no man my equal among the bronze-armed Achaeans,
not in battle, only in wars of words that others win.
If only strife could die from the lives of gods and men
and anger that drives the sanest man to flare in outrage—
bitter gall, sweeter than dripping streams of honey,
that swarms in people's chests and blinds like smoke—
just like the anger Agamemnon king of men
has roused within me now . . .
Enough.
Let bygones be bygones. Done is done.
Despite my anguish I will beat it down,
the fury mounting inside me, down by force.
But now I'll go and meet that murderer head-on,
that Hector who destroyed the dearest life I know.
For my own death, I'll meet it freely-whenever Zeus
and the other deathless gods would like to bring it on!
Not even Heracles fled his death, for all his power,
favorite son as he was to Father Zeus the King.
Fate crushed him, and Hera's savage anger.
And I too, if the same fate waits for me ...
I'll lie in peace, once I've gone down to death.
But now, for the moment, let me seize great glory!—
and drive some woman of Troy or deep-breasted Dardan
to claw with both hands at her tender cheeks and wipe away
her burning tears as the sobs come choking from her throat—
they'll learn that I refrained from war a good long time!
Don't try to hold me back from the fighting, mother,
love me as you do. You can't persuade me now."

 

  The goddess of the glistening feet replied,
"Yes, my son, you're right. No coward's work,
to save your exhausted friends from headlong death.
But your own handsome war-gear lies in Trojan hands,
bronze and burnished-and Hector in that flashing helmet,
Hector glories in your armor, strapped across his back.
Not that he will glory in it long, I tell you:
his own destruction hovers near him now. Wait—
don't fling yourself in the grind of battle yet,
not till you see me coming back with your own eyes.
Tomorrow I will return to you with the rising sun,
bearing splendid arms from Hephaestus, god of fire!"

 

  With that vow she turned away from her son
and faced and urged her sisters of the deep,
"Now down you go in the Ocean's folding gulfs
to visit father's halls-the Old Man of the Sea—
and tell him all. I am on my way to Olympus heights,
to the famous Smith Hephaestus—I pray he'll give my son
some fabulous armor full of the god's great fire!"

 

And under a foaming wave her sisters dove
as glistening-footed Thetis soared toward Olympus
to win her dear son an immortal set of arms.
And now,
as her feet swept her toward Olympus, ranks of Achaeans,
fleeing man-killing Hector with grim, unearthly cries,
reached the ships and the Hellespont's long shore.
As for Patroclus, there seemed no hope that Achaeans
could drag the corpse of Achilles' comrade out of range.
Again the Trojan troops and teams overtook the body
with Hector son of Priam storming fierce as fire.
Three times illustrious Hector shouted for support,
seized his feet from behind, wild to drag him off,
three times the Aeantes, armored in battle-fury
fought him off the corpse. But Hector held firm,
staking all on his massive fighting strength—
again and again he'd hurl himself at the melee,
again and again stand fast with piercing cries
but he never gave ground backward, not one inch.
The helmed Aeantes could no more frighten Hector,
the proud son of Priam, back from Patroclus' corpse
than shepherds out in the field can scare a tawny lion
off his kill when the hunger drives the beast claw-mad.
And now Hector would have hauled the body away
and won undying glory . . .
if wind-swift Iris had not swept from Olympus
bearing her message-Peleus' son must arm—
but all unknown to Zeus and the other gods
since Hera spurred her on. Halting near
she gave Achilles a flight of marching orders:
"To arms—son of Peleus! Most terrifying man alive!
Defend Patroclus! It's all for him, this merciless battle
pitched before the ships. They're mauling each other now,
Achaeans struggling to save the corpse from harm,
Trojans charging to haul it back to windy Troy.
Flashing Hector's far in the lead, wild to drag it off,
furious to lop the head from its soft, tender neck
and stake it high on the city's palisade.
Up with you—
no more lying low! Writhe with shame at the thought
Patroclus may be sport for the dogs of Troy!
Yours, the shame will be yours
if your comrade's corpse goes down to the dead defiled!"

 

  But the swift runner replied, "Immortal Iris—
what god has sped you here to tell me this?"

 

  Quick as the wind the rushing Iris answered,
"Hera winged me on, the illustrious wife of Zeus.
But the son of Cronus throned on high knows nothing,
nor does any other immortal housed on Olympus
shrouded deep in snow."
Achilles broke in quickly—
"How can I go to war? The Trojans have my gear.
And my dear mother told me I must not arm for battle,
not till I see her coming back with my own eyes—
she vowed to bring me burnished arms from the god of fire.


I know of no other armor. Whose gear could I wear?
None but Telamonian Ajax' giant shield.
But he's at the front, I'm sure, engaging Trojans,
slashing his spear to save Patroclus' body."

 

  Quick as the wind the goddess had a plan:
"We know—we too—they hold your famous armor.
Still, just as you are, go out to the broad trench
and show yourself to the Trojans. Struck with fear
at the sight of you, they might hold off from attack
and Achaea's fighting sons get second wind,
exhausted as they are . . .
Breathing room in war is all too brief."

 

  And Iris racing the wind went veering off
as Achilles, Zeus's favorite fighter, rose up now
and over his powerful shoulder Pallas slung the shield,
the tremendous storm-shield with all its tassels flaring—
and crowning his head the goddess swept a golden cloud
and from it she lit a fire to blaze across the field.
As smoke goes towering up the sky from out a town
cut off on a distant island under siege . . .
enemies battling round it, defenders all day long
trading desperate blows from their own city walls
but soon as the sun goes down the signal fires flash,
rows of beacons blazing into the air to alert their neighbors—
if only they'll come in ships to save them from disaster—
so now from Achilles' head the blaze shot up the sky.
He strode from the rampart, took his stand at the trench
but he would not mix with the milling Argive ranks.
He stood in awe of his mother's strict command.
So there he rose and loosed an enormous cry
and off in the distance Pallas shrieked out too
and drove unearthly panic through the Trojans.
Piercing loud as the trumpet's battle cry that blasts
from murderous raiding armies ringed around some city—
so piercing now the cry that broke from Aeacides.
And Trojans hearing the brazen voice of Aeacides,
all their spirits quaked—even sleek-maned horses,
sensing death in the wind, slewed their chariots round
and charioteers were struck dumb when they saw that fire,
relentless, terrible, burst from proud-hearted Achilles' head,
blazing as fiery-eyed Athena fueled the flames. Three times
the brilliant Achilles gave his great war cry over the trench,
three times the Trojans and famous allies whirled in panic—
and twelve of their finest fighters died then and there,
crushed by chariots, impaled on their own spears.
And now the exultant Argives seized the chance
to drag Patroclus' body quickly out of range
and laid him on a litter . . .
Standing round him, loving comrades mourned,
and the swift runner Achilles joined them, grieving,
weeping warm tears when he saw his steadfast comrade
lying dead on the bier, mauled by tearing bronze,
the man he sent to war with team and chariot
but never welcomed home again alive.

 

  Now Hera the ox-eyed queen of heaven drove the sun,
untired and all unwilling, to sink in the Ocean's depths
and the sun went down at last and brave Achaeans ceased
the grueling clash of arms, the leveling rout of war.

 

  And the Trojans in turn, far across the field,
pulling forces back from the last rough assault,
freed their racing teams from under chariot yokes
but before they thought of supper, grouped for council.
They met on their feet. Not one of them dared to sit
for terror seized them all—the great Achilles
who held back from the brutal fray so long
had just come blazing forth.
Panthous' son Polydamas led the debate,
a good clear head, and the only man who saw
what lay in the past and what the Trojans faced.
He was Hector's close comrade, born on the same night,
but excelled at trading words as he at trading spear-thrusts.
And now, with all good will, Polydamas rose and spoke:
"Weigh both sides of the crisis well, my friends.
What I urge is this: draw back to the city now.
Don't wait for the holy Dawn to find us here afield,
ranged by the ships—we're too far from our walls.
As long as that man kept raging at royal Agamemnon
the Argive troops were easier game to battle down.
I too was glad to camp the night on the shipways,
hopes soaring to seize their heavy rolling hulls.
But now racing Achilles makes my blood run cold.
So wild the man's fury he will never rest content,
holding out on the plain where Trojans and Argives
met halfway, exchanging blows in the savage onset—
never: he will fight for our wives, for Troy itself!
So retreat to Troy. Trust me—we will face disaster.
Now, for the moment, the bracing godsent night
has stopped the swift Achilles in his tracks.
But let him catch us lingering here tomorrow,
just as he rises up in arms—there may be some
who will sense his fighting spirit all too well.
You'll thank your stars to get back to sacred Troy,
whoever escapes him. Dogs and birds will have their fill—
of Trojan flesh, by heaven. Battalions of Trojans!
Pray god such grief will never reach my ears.
So follow my advice, hard as it may seem . . .
Tonight conserve our strength in the meeting place,
and the great walls and gates and timbered doors we hung,
well-planed, massive and bolted tight, will shield the city.
But tomorrow at daybreak, armed to the hilt for battle,
we man the towering ramparts. All the worse for him—
if Achilles wants to venture forth from the fleet,
fight us round our walls. Back to the ships he'll go,
once he's lashed the power out of his rippling stallions,
whipping them back and forth beneath our city walls.
Not even his fury will let him crash our gates—
he'll never plunder Troy.
Sooner the racing dogs will eat him raw!"

 

  Helmet flashing, Hector wheeled with a dark glance:
"No more, Polydamas! Your pleading repels me now.
You say go back again—be crammed inside the city.
Aren't you sick of being caged inside those walls?
Time was when the world would talk of Priam's Troy
as the city rich in gold and rich in bronze—but now
our houses are stripped of all their sumptuous treasures,
troves sold off and shipped to Phrygia, lovely Maeonia,
once great Zeus grew angry . . .
But now, the moment the son of crooked Cronus
allows me to seize some glory here at the ships
and pin these Argives back against the sea—
you fool, enough! No more thoughts of retreat
paraded before our people. Not that one Trojan
will ever take your lead—I'll never permit it.
Come, follow my orders! All obey me now.
Take supper now. Take your posts through camp.
And no forgetting the watch, each man wide awake.
And any Trojan so weighed down, so oppressed
by his own possessions, let him collect the lot,
pass them round to the people-a grand public feast.
Far better for one of ours to reap the benefits
than all the marauding Argives. Then, as you say,
'tomorrow at daybreak, armed to the hilt for battle'—
we slash to attack against their deep curved hulls!
If it really was Achilles who reared beside the ships,
all the worse for him—if he wants his fill of war.
I for one, I'll never run from his grim assault,
I'll stand up to the man—see if he bears off glory
or I bear it off myself! The god of war is impartial:
he hands out death to the man who hands out death."

 

  So Hector finished. The Trojans roared assent,
lost in folly. Athena had swept away their senses.
They gave applause to Hector's ruinous tactics,
none to Polydamas, who gave them sound advice.
And now their entire army settled down to supper
but all night long the Argives raised Patroclus' dirge.
And Achilles led them now in a throbbing chant of sorrow,
laying his man-killing hands on his great friend's chest,
convulsed with bursts of grief. Like a bearded lion
whose pride of cubs a deer-hunter has snatched away,
out of some thick woods, and back he comes, too late,
and his heart breaks but he courses after the hunter,
hot on his tracks down glen on twisting glen—
where can he find him?—gripped by piercing rage . . .
so Achilles groaned, deeply, crying out to his Myrmidons,
"O my captains! How empty the promise I let fall
that day I reassured Menoetius in his house-


I promised the king I'd bring him back his son,
home to Opois, covered in glory, Troy sacked,
hauling his rightful share of plunder home, home.
But Zeus will never, accomplish all our best-laid plans.
Look at us. Both doomed to stain red with our blood
the same plot of earth, a world away in Troy!
For not even I will voyage home again. Never.
No embrace in his halls from the old horseman Peleus
nor from mother, Thetis—this alien earth I stride
will hold me down at last.
  But now, Patroclus,
since I will follow you underneath the ground,
I shall not bury you, no, not till I drag back here
the gear and head of Hector, who slaughtered you,
my friend, greathearted friend . . .
Here in front of your flaming pyre I'll cut the throats
of a dozen sons of Troy in all their shining glory,
venting my rage on them for your destruction!
Till then you lie as you are beside my beaked ships
and round you the Trojan women and deep-breasted Dardans
will mourn you night and day, weeping burning tears,
women we fought to win—strong hands and heavy lance—
whenever we sacked rich cities held by mortal men."

 

  With that the brilliant Achilles ordered friends
to set a large three-legged cauldron over the fire
and wash the clotted blood from Patroclus' wounds
with all good speed. Hoisting over the blaze
a cauldron, filling it brimful with bathing water,
they piled fresh logs beneath and lit them quickly.
The fire lapped at the vessel's belly, the water warmed
and soon as it reached the boil in the glowing bronze
they bathed and anointed the body sleek with olive oil,
closed each wound with a soothing, seasoned unguent
and then they laid Patroclus on his bier . . .
covered him head to foot in a thin light sheet
and over his body spread the white linen shroud.
Then all night long, ringing the great runner Achilles,
Myrmidon fighters mourned and raised Patroclus' dirge.

 

  But Zeus turned to Hera, his wife and sister, saying,
"So, my ox-eyed Queen, you've had your way at last,
setting the famous runner Achilles on his feet.
Mother Hera—look, these long-haired Achaeans
must be sprung of your own immortal loins."
But her eyes widening, noble Hera answered,
"Dread majesty, son of Cronus, what are you saying?
Even a mortal man will act to help a friend,
condemned as a mortal always is to death
and hardly endowed with wisdom deep as ours.
So how could I, claiming to be the highest goddess—
both by birth and since I am called your consort
and you in turn rule all the immortal gods—
how could I hold back from these, these Trojans,
men I loathe, and fail to weave their ruin?"

 

  Now as the King and Queen provoked each other,
glistening-footed Thetis reached Hephaestus' house,
indestructible, bright as stars, shining among the gods,
built of bronze by the crippled Smith with his own hands.
There she found him, sweating, wheeling round his bellows,
pressing the work on twenty three-legged cauldrons,
an array to ring the walls inside his mansion.
He'd bolted golden wheels to the legs of each
so all on their own speed, at a nod from him,
they could roll to halls where the gods convene
then roll right home again—a marvel to behold.
But not quite finished yet . . .
the god had still to attach the inlaid handles.
These he was just fitting, beating in the rivets.
As he bent to the work with all his craft and cunning,
Thetis on her glistening feet drew near the Smith.
But Charis saw her first, Charis coming forward,
lithe and lovely in all her glittering headdress,
the Grace the illustrious crippled Smith had married.
Approaching Thetis, she caught her hand and spoke her name:
"Thetis of flowing robes! What brings you to our house?
A beloved, honored friend-but it's been so long,
your visits much too rare. Follow me in, please,
let me offer you all a guest could want."
Welcome words,
and the radiant goddess Charis led the way inside.
She seated her on a handsome, well-wrought chair,
studded with silver, under it slipped a stool
and called the famous Smith: "Hephaestus, come—
look who's here! Thetis would ask a favor of you!"

 

  And the famous crippled Smith exclaimed warmly,
"Thetis—here? Ah then a wondrous, honored goddess
comes to grace our house! Thetis saved my life
when the mortal pain came on me after my great fall,
thanks to my mother's will, that brazen bitch,
she wanted to hide me-because I was a cripple.
What shattering anguish I'd have suffered then
if Thetis had not taken me to her breast, Eurynome too,
the daughter of Ocean's stream that runs around the world.
Nine years I lived with both, forging bronze by the trove,
elegant brooches, whorled pins, necklaces, chokers, chains—
there in the vaulted cave—and round us Ocean's currents
swirled in a foaming, roaring rush that never died.
And no one knew. Not a single god or mortal,
only Thetis and Eurynome knew-they saved me.
And here is Thetis now, in our own house!
So I must do all I can to pay her back,
the price for the life she saved . . .
the nymph of the sea with sleek and lustrous locks.
Quickly, set before her stranger's generous fare
while I put away my bellows and all my tools."
With that
he heaved up from the anvil block-his immense hulk
hobbling along but his shrunken legs moved nimbly.


He swung the bellows aside and off the fires,
gathered the tools he'd used to weld the cauldrons
and packed them all in a sturdy silver strongbox.
Then he sponged off his brow and both burly arms,
his massive neck and shaggy chest, pulled on a shirt
and grasping a heavy staff, Hephaestus left his forge
and hobbled on. Handmaids ran to attend their master,
all cast in gold but a match for living, breathing girls.
Intelligence fills their hearts, voice and strength their frames,
from the deathless gods they've learned their works of hand.
They rushed to support their lord as he went bustling on
and lurching nearer to Thetis, took his polished seat,
reached over to clutch her hand and spoke her name:
"Thetis of flowing robes! What brings yop to our house?
A beloved, honored friend-but it's been so long,
your visits much too rare.
Tell me what's on your mind. I am eager to do it—
whatever I can do . . . whatever can be done."

 

  But Thetis burst into tears; her voice welling:
"Oh Hephaestus—who of all the goddesses on Olympus,
who has borne such withering sorrows in her heart?
Such pain as Zeus has given me, above all others!
Me out of all the daughters of the sea he chose
to yoke to a mortal man, Peleus, son of Aeacus,
and I endured his bed, a mortal's bed, resisting
with all my will. And now he lies in the halls,
broken with grisly age, but now my griefs are worse.
Remember? Zeus also gave me a son to bear and breed,
the splendor of heroes, and he shot up like a young branch,
like a fine tree I reared him—the orchard's crowning glory—
but only to send him off in the beaked ships to Troy
to battle Trojans! Never again will I embrace him
striding home through the doors of Peleus' house.
And long as I have him with me, still alive,
looking into the sunlight, he is racked with anguish.
I go to his side—nothing I do can help him. Nothing.
That girl the sons of Achaea picked out for his prize—
right from his grasp the mighty Agamemnon tore her,
and grief for her has been gnawing at his heart.
But then the Trojans pinned the Achaeans tight
against their sterns, they gave them no way out,
and the Argive warlords begged my son to help,
they named in full the troves of glittering gifts
they'd send his way. But at that point he refused
to beat disaster off—refused himself, that is—
but he buckled his own armor round Patroclus,
sent him into battle with an army at his back.
And all day long they fought at the Scaean Gates,
that very day they would have stormed the city too,
if Apollo had not killed Menoetius' gallant son
as he laid the Trojans low—Apollo cut him down
among the champions there and handed Hector glory.
So now I come, I throw myself at your knees,
please help me! Give my son—he won't live Tong—
a shield and helmet and tooled greaves with ankle-straps
and armor for his chest. All that he had was lost,
lost when the Trojans killed his steadfast friend.
Now he lies on the ground—his heart is breaking."

 

  And the famous crippled Smith replied, "Courage!
Anguish for all that armor—sweep it from your mind.
If only I could hide him away from pain and death,
that day his grim destiny comes to take Achilles,
as surely as glorious armor shall be his, armor
that any man in the world of men will marvel at
through all the years to come—whoever sees its splendor."

 

  With that he left her there and made for his bellows,
turning them on the fire, commanding, "Work-to work!"
And the bellows, all twenty, blew on the crucibles,
breathing with all degrees of shooting, fiery heat
as the god hurried on—a blast for the heavy work,
a quick breath for the light, all precisely gauged
to the god of fire's wish and the pace of the work in hand.
Bronze he flung in the blaze, tough, durable bronze
and tin and, priceless gold and silver, and then,
planting the huge anvil upon its block, he gripped
his mighty hammer in one hand, the other gripped his tongs.

 

  And first Hephaestus makes a great and massive shield,
blazoning well-wrought emblems all across its surface,
raising a rim around it, glittering, triple-ply
with a silver shield-strap run from edge to edge
and five layers of metal to build the shield itself,
and across its vast expanse with all his craft and cunning
the god creates a world of gorgeous immortal work.

 

  There he made the earth and there the sky and the sea
and the inexhaustible blazing sun and the moon rounding full
and there the constellations, all that crown the heavens,
the Pleiades and the Hyades, Orion in all his power too
and the Great Bear that mankind also calls the Wagon:
she wheels on her axis always fixed, watching the Hunter,
and she alone is denied a plunge in the Ocean's baths.

 

  And he forged on the shield two noble cities filled
with mortal men. With weddings and wedding feasts in one
and under glowing torches they brought forth the brides
from the women's chambers, marching through the streets
while choir on choir the wedding song rose high
and the young men came dancing, whirling round in rings
and among them flutes and harps kept up their stirring call—
women rushed to the doors and each stood moved with wonder.
And the people massed, streaming into the marketplace
where a quarrel had broken out and two men struggled
over the blood-price for a kinsman just murdered.
One declaimed in public, vowing payment in full—
the other spurned him, he would not take a thing—
so both men pressed for a judge to cut the knot.
The crowd cheered on both, they took both sides,
but heralds held them back as the city elders sat
on polished stone benches, forming the sacred circle,
grasping in hand the staffs of clear-voiced heralds,
and each leapt to his feet to plead the case in turn.
Two bars of solid gold shone on the ground before them,
a prize for the judge who'd speak the straightest verdict.

 

  But circling the other city camped a divided army
gleaming in battle-gear, and two plans split their ranks:
to plunder the city or share the riches with its people,
hoards the handsome citadel stored within its depths.
But the people were not surrendering, not at all.
They armed for a raid, hoping to break the siege—
loving wives and innocent children standing guard
on the ramparts, flanked by elders bent with age
as men marched out to war. Ares and Pallas led them,
both burnished gold, gold the attire they donned, and great,
magnificent in their armor—gods for all the world,
looming up in their brilliance, towering over troops.
And once they reached the perfect spot for attack,
a watering place where all the herds collected,
there they douched, wrapped in glowing bronze.
Detached from the ranks, two scouts took up their posts,
the eyes of the army waiting to spot a convoy,
the enemy's flocks and crook-homed cattle coming . . .
Come they did,. quickly, two shepherds behind them,
playing their hearts out on their pipes—treachery
never crossed their minds. But the soldiers saw them,
rushed them, cut off at a stroke the herds of oxen
and sleek sheep-flocks glistening silver-gray
and killed the herdsmen too. Now the besiegers,
soon as they heard the uproar burst from the cattle
as they debated, huddled in council, mounted at once
behind their racing teams, rode hard to the rescue,
arrived at once, and lining up for assault
both armies battled it out along the river banks—
they raked each other with hurtling bronze-tipped spears.
And Strife and Havoc plunged in the fight, and violent Death—
now seizing a man alive with fresh wounds, now one unhurt,
now hauling a dead man through the slaughter by the heels,
the cloak on her back stained red with human blood.
So they clashed and fought like living, breathing men
grappling each other's corpses, dragging off the dead.

 

  And he forged a fallow field, broad rich plowland
tilled for the third time, and across it crews of plowmen
wheeled their teams, driving them up and back and soon
as they'd reach the end-strip, moving into the turn,
a man would run up quickly
and hand them a cup of honeyed, mellow wine
as the crews would turn back down along the furrows,
pressing again to reach the end of the deep fallow field
and the earth churned black behind them, like earth churning,
solid gold as it was—that was the wonder of Hephaestus' work.

 

  And he forged a king's estate where harvesters labored,
reaping the ripe grain, swinging their whetted scythes.
Some stalks fell in line with the reapers, row on row,
and others the sheaf-binders girded round with ropes,
three binders standing over the sheaves, behind them
boys gathering up the cut swaths, filling their arms,
supplying grain to the binders, endless bundles.
And there in the midst the king,
scepter in hand at the head of the reaping-rows,
stood tall in silence, rejoicing in his heart.
And off to the side, beneath a spreading oak,
the heralds were setting out the harvest feast,
they were dressing a great ox they had slaughtered,
while attendant women poured out barley, generous,
glistening handfuls strewn for the reapers' midday meal.

 

  And he forged a thriving vineyard loaded with clusters,
bunches of lustrous grapes in gold, ripening deep purple
and climbing vines shot up on silver vine-poles.
And round it he cut a ditch in dark blue enamel
and round the ditch he staked a fence in tin.
And one lone footpath led toward the vineyard
and down it the pickers ran
whenever they went to strip the grapes at, vintage—
girls and boys, their hearts leaping in innocence,
bearing away the sweet ripe fruit in wicker baskets.
And there among them a young boy plucked his lyre,
so clear it could break the heart with longing,
and what he sang was a dirge for the dying year,
lovely . . . his fine voice rising and falling low
as the rest followed, all together, frisking, singing,
shouting, their dancing footsteps beating out the time.

 

  And he forged on the shield a herd of longhorn cattle,
working the bulls in beaten gold and tin, lowing loud
and rumbling out of the farmyard dung to pasture
along a rippling stream, along the swaying reeds.
And the golden drovers kept the herd in line,
four in all, with nine dogs at their heels,
their paws flickering quickly—a savage roar!—
a crashing attack—and a pair of ramping lions
had seized a bull from the cattle's front ranks—
he bellowed out as they dragged him off in agony.
Packs of dogs and the young herdsmen rushed to help
but the lions ripping open the hide of the huge bull
were gulping down the guts and the black pooling blood
while the herdsmen yelled the fast pack on-no use.
The hounds shrank from sinking teeth in the lions,
they balked, hunching close, barking, cringing away.

 

  And the famous crippled Smith forged a meadow
deep in a shaded glen for shimmering flocks to graze,
with shepherds' steadings, well-roofed huts and sheepfolds.

 

  And the crippled Smith brought all his art to bear
on a dancing circle, broad as the circle Daedalus
once laid out on Cnossos' spacious fields
for Ariadne the girl with lustrous hair.
Here young boys and girls, beauties courted
with costly gifts of oxen, danced and danced,
linking their arms, gripping each other's wrists.
And the girls wore robes of linen light and flowing,
the boys wore finespun tunics rubbed with a gloss of oil,
the girls were crowned with a bloom of fresh garlands,
the boys swung golden daggers hung on silver belts.
And now they would run in rings on their skilled feet,
nimbly, quick as a crouching potter spins his wheel,
palming it smoothly, giving it practice twirls
to see it run, and now they would run in rows,
in rows crisscrossing rows-rapturous dancing.
A breathless crowd stood round them struck with joy
and through them a pair of tumblers dashed and sprang,
whirling in leaping handsprings, leading on the dance.

 

  And he forged the Ocean River's mighty power girdling
round the outmost rim of the welded indestructible shield.

 

  And once the god had made that great and massive shield
he made Achilles a breastplate brighter than gleaming fire,
he made him a sturdy helmet to fit the fighter's temples,
beautiful, burnished work, and raised its golden crest
and made him greaves of flexing, pliant tin.
Now,
when the famous crippled Smith had finished off
that grand array of armor, lifting it in his arms
he laid it all at the feet of Achilles' mother Thetis—
and down she flashed like a hawk from snowy Mount Olympus
bearing the brilliant gear, the god of fire's gift.

As Dawn rose up in her golden robe from Ocean's tides,
bringing light to immortal gods and mortal men,
Thetis sped Hephaestus' gifts to the ships.
She found her beloved son lying facedown,
embracing Patroclus' body, sobbing, wailing,
and. round him crowded troops of mourning comrades.
And the glistening goddess moved among them now,
seized Achilles' hand and urged him, spoke his name:
"My child, leave your friend to lie there dead—
we must, though it breaks our hearts . . .
The will of the gods has crushed him once for all.
But here, Achilles, accept this glorious armor, look,
a gift from the god of fire—burnished bright, finer
than any mortal has ever borne across his back!"
Urging,
the goddess laid the armor down at Achilles' feet

 

 

and the gear clashed out in all its blazoned glory.
A tremor ran through all the Myrmidon ranks—none dared
to look straight at the glare, each fighter shrank away.
Not Achilles. The more he gazed, the deeper his anger went,
his eyes flashing under his eyelids, fierce as fire—
exulting, holding the god's shining gifts in his hands.
And once he'd thrilled his heart with looking hard
at the armor's well-wrought beauty,
he turned to his mother, winged words flying:
"Mother—armor sent by the god—you're right,
only immortal gods could forge such work,
no man on earth could ever bring it off!
Now, by heaven, I'll arm and go to war,
But all the while my blood runs cold with fear—
Menoetius' fighting son . . . the carrion blowflies
will settle into his wounds, gouged deep by the bronze,
worms will breed and seethe, defile the man's corpse—
his life's ripped out—his flesh may rot to nothing."

 

  But glistening-footed Thetis reassured him:
"O my child, wipe these worries from your mind.
I'll find a way to protect him from those swarms,
the vicious flies that devour men who fall in battle.
He could lie there dead till a year has run its course
and his flesh still stand firm, even fresher than now . . .
So go and call the Argive warriors to the muster:
renounce your rage at the proud commander Agamemnon,
then arm for battle quickly, don your fighting power!"

 

  With that she breathed in her son tremendous courage
then instilled in Patroclus' nostrils fresh ambrosia,
blood-red nectar too, to make his flesh stand firm.

 

  But brilliant Achilles strode along the surf,
crying his piercing cry and roused Achaean warriors.
Even those who'd kept to the beached ships till now,
the helmsmen who handled the heavy steering-oars
and stewards left on board to deal out rations—
even they trooped to the muster: great Achilles
who held back from the brutal fighting so long
had just come blazing forth.
And along came two aides of Ares limping in,
the battle-hard Tydides flanked by good Odysseus
leaning on their spears, still bearing painful wounds,
and slowly found their seats in the front ranks.
And the lord of men Agamemnon came in last of all,
weighed down by the wound he took in the rough charge
when Coon, son of Anterior, slashed his arm with bronze.
And now, as all the Achaean armies massed together,
the swift runner Achilles rose among them, asking,
"Agamemnon—was it better for both of us, after all,
for you and me to rage at each other, raked by anguish,
consumed by heartsick strife, all for a young girl?
If only Arternis had cut her down at the ships—
with one quick shaft—
that day I destroyed Lyrnessus, chose her as my prize.
How many fewer friends had gnawed the dust of the wide world,
brought down by enemy hands while I raged on and on.
Better? Yes—for Hector and Hector's Trojans!
Not for the Argives. For years to come, I think,
they will remember the feud that flared between us both.
Enough. Let bygones be bygones. Done is done.
Despite my anguish I will beat it down,
the fury mounting inside me, down by force.
Now, by god, I call a halt to all my anger—
it's wrong to keep on raging, heart inflamed forever.
Quickly, drive our long-haired Achaeans to battle now!
So I can go at the Trojans once again and test their strength
and see if they still long to camp the night at the ships.
They'll gladly sink to a knee and rest at home, I'd say—
whoever comes through alive from the heat of combat,
out from under my spear!"
  Welcome, rousing words,
and Achaeans-at-arms roared out with joy to hear
the greathearted Achilles swearing off his rage.
Now it was King Agamemnon's turn to. address them.
He rose from his seat, not moving toward the center.
The lord of men spoke out from where he stood:
"My friends, fighting Danaans, aides of Ares . . .
when a man stands up to speak, it's well to listen.
Not to interrupt him, the only courteous thing.
Even the finest speaker finds intrusions hard.
Yet how can a person hear or say a word?—
this howling din could drown the clearest voice.
But I will declare my inmost feelings to Achilles.
And you, the rest of you Argives, listen closely:
every man of you here, mark each word I say.
Often the armies brought this matter up against me—
they would revile me in public. But I am not to blame!
Zeus and Fate and the Fury stalking through the night,
they are the ones who drove that savage madness in my heart,
that day in assembly when I seized Achilles' prize—
on my own authority, true, but what could I do?
A god impels all things to their fulfillment:
Ruin, eldest daughter of Zeus, she blinds us all,
that fatal madness—she with those delicate feet of hers,
never touching the earth, gliding over the heads of men
to trap us all. She entangles one man, now another.
Why, she and her frenzy blinded Zeus one time,
highest, greatest of men and gods, they say:
even Father Zeus! Hera deceived him blind—
feminine as she is, and only armed with guile—
that day in Thebes, ringed with tower on tower,
Alcmena was poised to bear invincible Heracles.
So the proud Father declared to all immortals,
'Hear me, all you gods and all goddesses too,
as I proclaim what's brooding deep inside me.
Today the goddess of birth pangs and labor
will bring to light a human child, a man-child
born of the stock of men who spring from my blood,
one who will lord it over all who dwell around him.'
But teeming with treachery noble Hera set her trap,
'You will prove a liar . . .
when the time arrives to crown your words with action.
Come now, my Olympian, swear your inviolate oath
that he shall lord it over all who dwell around him—
that child who drops between a woman's knees today,
born of the stock of men who spring from Zeus's blood.'
And Zeus suspected nothing, not a word of treachery.
He swore his mighty oath—blinded, from that hour on.
Speeding down in a flash from Mount Olympus' summit
Hera reached Achaean Argos in no time, where,
she knew for a fact, the hardy wife of Sthenelus,
Perseus' own son, was about to bear her child,
but only seven months gone. So into the light
Queen Hera brought the baby, two months shy,
and the goddess stopped Alcmena's hour of birth,
she held back the Lady of Labor's birthing pangs
and rushed in person to give the word to Zeus:
'Zeus, Father, lord of the lightning bolt—
here is a piece of news to warm your heart!
Today an illustrious son is born to rulee the Argives . . .
Eurystheus, son of Sthenelus, descended of Perseus—
so he is born of your own stock and immortal blood
and it's only right for him to rule the Argivest'
With that, a stab of agony struck his deep heart.
Suddenly seizing Ruin by her glossy oiled braids—
he was furious, raging—now he swore his inviolate oath
that never again would she return to Olympus' starry skies,
that maddening goddess, Ruin, Ruin who blinds us all.
With that he whirled her round in his massive hand
and flung her out of the brilliant, starry skies
and she soon found herself in the world of men.
But Zeus could never think of Ruin without a groan
whenever he saw Heracles, his own dear son endure
some shameful labor Eurystheus forced upon him.

 

  And so with me, I tell you!
When tall Hector with that flashing helmet of his
kept slaughtering Argives pinned against our ships—
how could I once forget that madness, that frenzy,
the Ruin that blinded me from that first day?
But since I was blinded and Zeus stole my wits,
I am intent on setting things to rights, at once:
I'11 give that priceless ransom paid for friendship.
Gear up for battle now! And rouse the rest of your armies!
As for the gifts, here I am to produce them all,
all that good Odysseus promised you in full,
the other day, when he approached your tents.
Or if you prefer, hold off a moment now . . .
much as your heart would spur you on to war.
Aides will fetch that treasure trove from my ship,
they'll bring it here to you, so you can behold
what hoards I'll give to set your heart at peace."

 

  But the swift runner Achilles broke in sharply—
"Field marshal Atrides, lord of men Agamemnon,
produce the gifts if you like, as you see fit,
or keep them back, it's up to you. But now—
quickly, call up the wild joy of war at once!
It's wrong to malinger here with talk, wasting time—
our great work lies all before us, still to do.
Just as you see Achilles charge the front once more,
hurling his bronze spear, smashing Troy's battalions—
so each of you remember to battle down your man!"

 

  But Odysseus fine at tactics answered firmly,
"Not so quickly, brave as you are, godlike Achilles.
Achaea's troops are hungry: don't drive them against- Troy
to fight the Trojans. It's no quick skirmish shaping,
once the massed formations of men begin to clash
with a god breathing fury in both sides at once.
No, command them now to take their food and wine
by the fast ships—a soldier's strength and nerve.
No fighter can battle all day long, cut-and-thrust
till the sun goes down, if he is starved for food.
Even though his courage may blaze up for combat,
his limbs will turn to lead before he knows it,
thirst and hunger will overtake him quickly,
his knees will cave in as the man struggles on.
But the one who takes his fill of food and wine
before he grapples enemies full force, dawn to dusk—
the heart in his chest keeps pounding fresh with courage,
nor do his legs give out till all break off from battle.
Come, dismiss your ranks, have them make their meal.
As for the gifts, let the king of men Agamemnon
have the lot of them hauled amidst our muster,
so all the troops can see the trove themselves
and you, Achilles, you can warm your heart.
And let the king stand up before the entire army,
let Agamemnon swear to you his solemn, binding oath:
he never mounted her bed, never once made love with her,
the natural thing, my lord, men and women joined.
And you, Achilles, show some human kindness too,
in your own heart. Then, as a peace offering,
let him present you a lavish feast in his tents
so you won't lack your just deserts at last.
And you, great son of Atreus . . .
you be more just to others, from now on.
It is no disgrace for a king to appease a man
when the king himself was first to give offense."

 

  The lord of men Agamemnon answered warmly,
"Son of Laertes, I delight to hear your counsel!
You have covered it all fairly, point by point.
I'll gladly swear your oath—the spirit moves me now—
nor will I break that oath in the eyes of any god.
But let Achilles remain here, for the moment,
much as his heart would race him into war.
The rest remain here too, all in strict formation,
till the treasure trove is hauled forth from my tents
and we can seal our binding oaths in blood.
And you, Odysseus, I tell you, I command you:
pick out young men, the best in our joint forces,
bring forth the gifts from my ship, all we promised
Achilles just the other day, and bring the women too.
Here in the presence of our united armed contingents
let Talthybius quickly prepare a wild boar for me—
we must sacrifice to the Sun and Father Zeus."

 

  But the swift runner Achilles interjected,
"Field marshal Atrides, lord of men Agamemnon,
better busy yourself with that some other time,
when a sudden lull in the fighting lets us rest
and the fury's not such fire inside my heart.
Now our men are lying mauled on the field—
all that Hector the son of Priam overwhelmed
when Zeus was handing Hector his high glory—
but you, you and Odysseus urge us to a banquet!
I, by god, I'd drive our Argives into battle now,
starving, famished, and only then, when the sun goes down,
lay on a handsome feast—once we've avenged our shame.
Before then, for me at least, neither food nor drink
will travel down my throat, not with my friend dead,
there in my shelter, torn to shreds by the sharp bronze . . .
His feet turned to the door, stretched out for burial,
round him comrades mourning.
You talk of food?
I have no taste for food—what I really crave
is slaughter and blood and the choking groans of men!"

 

  But Odysseus, cool tactician, tried to calm him:
"Achilles, son of Peleus, greatest of the Achaeans,
greater than I, stronger with spears by no small edge—
yet I might just surpass you in seasoned judgment
by quite a lot, since I have years on you
and I know the world much better . . .
So let your heart be swayed by what I say,
Now fighting men will sicken of battle quickly:
the more dead husks the bronze strews on the ground
the sparser the harvest then, when Zeus almighty
tips his scales and the tide of battle turns—
the great steward on high who rules our mortal wars.
You want the men to grieve for the dead by starving?
Impossible. Too many falling, day after day—battalions!
When could we find a breathing space from fasting?
No. We must steel our hearts. Bury our dead,
with tears for the day they die, not one day more.
And all those left alive, after the hateful carnage,
remember food and drink—so all the more fiercely
we can fight our enemies, nonstop, no mercy,
durable as the bronze that wraps our bodies.
Let no one hold back now, waiting further summons—
these are your summons: pain and death to the man
who skulks beside the ships! Now, all in a mass,
drive hard against them—rousing battering war
against these stallion-breaking Trojans!"
  He led an escort
formed of the brave old soldier Nestor's sons,
Meges the son of Phyleus, Meriones and Thoas,
Lycomedes the son of Creon, Melanippus too.
Off they went to the tents of Agamemnon—
a few sharp commands and the work was done.
Seven tripods hauled from the tents, as promised,
twenty burnished cauldrons, a dozen massive stallions.
They quickly brought out women, flawless, skilled in crafts,
seven, and Briseis in all her beauty made the eighth.
Then Odysseus weighed out ten full bars of gold
and led the princes back, laden with other gifts,
and they set them down amid the meeting grounds.
Agamemnon rose to his feet.
The crier Talthybius, his voice clear as a god's,
holding the boar in his arms, flanked the great commander.
And Atreus' son drew forth the dagger always slung
at his battle-sword's big sheath, he cut some hairs
from the boar's head, first tufts to start the rite,
and lifting up his arms to Zeus on high he prayed
while the armies held fast to their seats in silence,
all by rank and file, listening to their king.
He scanned the vaulting skies as his voice rang in prayer:
"Zeus be my witness first, the highest, best of gods!
Then Earth, the Sun, and Furies stalking the world below
to wreak revenge on the dead who broke their oaths—
I swear I never laid a hand on the girl Briseis,
I never forced her to serve my lust in bed
or perform some other task . . .
Briseis remained untouched within my tents.
True. If a word of what I say is falsely sworn,
may the gods deal out such blows to me, such agonies
as they deal out to the men who break sworn oaths
and take their names in vain!"
On those terms
he dragged his ruthless dagger across the boar's throat.
Talthybius whirled the carcass round about his head
and slung it into the yawning gulf of the gray sea
for swarming fish to eat. Then Prince Achilles stood
and addressed the Argives keen for battle: "Father Zeus—
great are the blinding frenzies you deal out to men!
If not, I swear, Atrides could never have roused
the fury in me, the rage that would not die,
or wrenched the girl away against my will—
stubborn, implacable man. But Zeus, somehow,
was bent on this awesome slaughter of Achaeans.
Go now, take your meal-the sooner to bring on war."

 

  This brusque command dispersed the muster quickly.
The contingents scattered, each to its own ship.
Exultant Myrmidons took charge of the gifts
and bore them off to their royal captain's moorings.
They stowed them safe in his shelters, settled the women
and proud henchmen drove the teams to his herds.

 

  And so Briseis returned, like golden Aphrodite,
but when she saw Patroclus lying torn by the bronze
she flung herself on his body, gave a piercing cry
and with both hands clawing deep at her breasts,
her soft throat and lovely face, she sobbed,
a woman like a goddess in her grief, "Patroclus—
dearest joy of my heart, my harrowed, broken heart!
I left you alive that day I left these shelters,
now I come back to find you fallen, captain of armies!
So grief gives way to grief, my life one endless sorrow!
The husband to whom my father and noble mother gave me,
I saw him torn by the sharp bronze before our city,
and my three brothers—a single mother bore us:
my brothers, how I loved you!—
you all went down to death on the same day .. .
But you, Patroclus, you would not let me weep,
not when the swift Achilles cut my husband down,
not when he plundered the lordly Mynes' city—
not even weep! No, again and again you vowed
you'd make me godlike Achilles' lawful, wedded wife,
you would sail me west in your warships, home to Phthia
and there with the Myrmidons hold my marriage feast.
So now I mourn your death—I will never stop—
you were always kind."
Her voice, rang out in tears
and the women wailed in answer, grief for Patroclus
calling forth each woman's private sorrows.
But Achaea's warlords clustered round Achilles,
begging him to eat. He only spurned them, groaning,
"I beg you—if any comrade will hear me out in this—
stop pressing me now to glut myself with food and drink,
now such painful grief has come and struck my heartl
I'll hold out till the sun goes down-enduring—
fasting-despite your appeals."
  His voice so firm
that Achilles caused the other kings to scatter.
But the two Atridae stayed, and good Odysseus,
Nestor, Idomeneus, Phoenix the old charioteer,
all trying to comfort Achilles deep in sorrow.
But no comfort could reach the fighter's heart
till he went striding into the jaws of bloody war.
The memories swept over him . . .
sighs heaved from his depths as Achilles burst forth,
"Ah god, time and again, my doomed, my dearest friend,
you would set before us a seasoned meal yourself,
here in our tents, in your quick and expert way,
when Argive forces rushed to fight the Trojans,
stampeding those breakers of horses into rout.
But now you lie before me, hacked to pieces here
while the heart within me fasts from food and drink
though stores inside are full—
I'm sick with longing for you!
There is no more shattering blow that I could suffer.
Not even if I should learn of my own father's death,
who, this moment, is weeping warm tears in Phthia,
I know it, bereft of a son as loved as this . . .
and here I am in a distant land, fighting Trojans,
and all for that blood-chilling horror, Helen!—
or the death of any dear son, reared for me in Scyros,
if Prince Neoptolemus is still among the living.
Till now I'd hoped, hoped with all my heart
that I alone would die
far from the stallion-land of Argos, here in Troy,
but you, Patroclus, would journey back to Phthia
and then you'd ferry Neoptolemus home from Scyros,
fast in your black ship, and show him all my wealth,
my servingmen, my great house with the high vaulting roof.
For father, I fear—if he's not dead and buried yet—
just clings, perhaps, to his last breath of life,
ground down now by the hateful siege of years,
waiting, day after day, for painful news of me—
until he learns his only son is dead."

 

  His voice rang out in tears and the warlords mourned in answer,
each remembering those he had left behind at home.
Seeing their grief the Father, filled with pity,
quickly turned to Athena with winging words:
"My child, have you abandoned him forever?
Your favorite man of war. Is it all lost now?—
no more care for Achilles left inside your heart?
There he huddles before his curving, beaked ships,
racked with grief for his dear friend while others scatter,
settling down to their meal. He's fasting, never fed.
Go. Run and instill some nectar and sweet ambrosia
deep within his chest. Stave off his hunger now."

 

  So he urged Athena already poised for action.
Down the sky she swooped through the clear bright air
like a shrieking, sharp-winged hawk, and while Achaeans
quickly armed throughout the encampment, she instilled
some nectar and sweet ambrosia deep in Achilles' chest
so the stabbing pangs of hunger could not sap his knees.
Then back to her mighty Father's sturdy halls she went
as troops moved out, pouring out of the fast trim ships.
Thick-and-fast as the snow comes swirling down from Zeus,
frozen sharp when the North Wind born in heaven blasts it on—
so massed, so dense the glistening burnished helmets shone,
streaming out of the ships, and shields with jutting bosses,
breastplates welded front and back and the long ashen spears.
The glory of armor lit the skies and the whole earth laughed,
rippling under the glitter of bronze, thunder resounding
under trampling feet of armies. And in their midst
the brilliant Achilles began to arm for battle . . .
A sound of grinding came from the fighter's teeth,
his eyes blazed forth in searing points of fire,
unbearable grief came surging through his heart
and now, bursting with rage against the men of Troy,
he donned Hephaestus' gifts—magnificent armor
the god of fire forged with all his labor.
First he wrapped his legs with well-made greaves,
fastened behind his heels with silver ankle-clasps,
next he strapped the breastplate round his chest
then over his shoulder Achilles slung his sword,
the fine bronze blade with its silver-studded hilt,
then hoisted the massive shield flashing far and wide
like a full round moon—and gleaming bright as the light
that reaches sailors out at sea, the flare of a watchfire
burning strong in a lonely sheepfold up some mountain slope
when the gale-winds hurl the crew that fights against them
far over the fish-swarming sea, far from loved ones—
so the gleam from Achilles' well-wrought blazoned shield
shot up and hit the skies. Then lifting his rugged helmet
he set it down on his brows, and the horsehair crest
shone like a star and the waving golden plumes shook
that Hephaestus drove in bristling thick along its ridge.
And brilliant Achilles tested himself in all his gear,
Achilles spun on his heels to see if it fitted tightly,
see if his shining limbs ran free within it, yes,
and it felt like buoyant wings lifting the great captain.
And then, last, Achilles drew his father's spear
from its socket-stand—weighted, heavy, tough.
No other Achaean fighter could heft that shaft,
only Achilles had the skill to wield it well:
Pelian ash it was, a gift to his father Peleus
presented by Chiron once, hewn on Pelion's crest
to be the death of heroes.
  Now the war-team—
Alcimus and Automedon worked to yoke them quickly.
They cinched the supple breast-straps round their chests
and driving the bridle irons home between their jaws,
pulled the reins back taut to the bolted chariot.
Seizing a glinting whip, his fist on the handgrip,
Automedon leapt aboard behind the team and behind him
Achilles struck his stance, helmed for battle now,
glittering in his armor like the sun astride the skies,
his ringing, daunting voice commanding his father's horses:
"Roan Beauty and Charger, illustrious foals of Lightfoot!
Try hard, do better this time—bring your charioteer
back home alive to his waiting Argive comrades
once we're through with fighting. Don't leave Achilles
there on the battlefield as you left Patroclus—dead!"

 

  And Roan Beauty the horse with flashing hoofs
spoke up from under the yoke, bowing his head low
so his full mane came streaming down the yoke-pads,
down along the yoke to sweep the ground . . .
The white-armed goddess Hera gave him voice:
"Yes! we will save your life—this time too—
master, mighty Achilles! But the day of death
already hovers near, and we are not to blame
but a great god is and the strong force of fate.
Not through our want of speed or any lack of care
did the Trojans strip the armor off Patroclus' back.
It was all that matchless god, sleek-haired Leto's son—
he killed him among the champions and handed Hector glory.
Our team could race with the rush of the West Wind,
the strongest, swiftest blast on earth, men say—
still you are doomed to die by force, Achilles,
cut down by a deathless god and mortal man!"

 

  He said no more. The Furies struck him dumb.
But the fiery runner Achilles burst out in anger,
"Why, Roan Beauty—why prophesy myy doom?
Don't waste your breath. I know, well I know—
I am destined to die here, far from my dear father,
far from mother. But all the same I will never stop
till I drive the Trojans to their bloody fill of war!"

 

A high stabbing cry—
and out in the front ranks he drove his plunging stallions.

So by the beaked ships the Argives formed for battle,
arming round you, Achilles—Achilles starved for war—
and faced by the Trojan ranks along the plain's high ground.
At the same time, from the peak of rugged ridged Olympus
Zeus commanded Themis to call the gods to council.
Themis made her rounds, ranging far and wide
and summoned all to march to Father's halls.
Not a single river failed to come, none apart
from the Ocean stream that holds the earth in place,
nor a single nymph who haunts the rustling groves
and the river springs and the lush, grassy meadows.
All flocked to the halls of Zeus who gathers storms
and found their seats in the colonnades of polished stone
Hephaestus built for Father Zeus with all his craft and cunning.

 

  And so the powers assembled deep in Zeus's halls.
Nor did the god of earthquakes fail to hear the goddess.
Surging up from the sea he came to join their ranks,
took a seat in their midst and probed Zeus's plans:
"Why now, great king of the lightning,
why summon the gods to council once again?
Still some concern for Troy's and Achaea's armies?—
now that battle is set to burst in flames between them!"

 

  But Zeus who marshals the thunderheads replied,
"God of the earthquake, well you know my plans,
the strategy in my mind, and why I call you here
These mortals do concern me, dying as they are.
Still, here I stay on Olympus throned aloft,
here in my steep mountain cleft, to feast my eyes
and delight my heart. The rest of you: down you go,
go to Trojans, go to Achaeans. Help either side
as the fixed desire drives each god to act.
If Achilles fights the Trojans—unopposed by us—
not for a moment will they hold his breakneck force.
Even before now they'd shake to see him coming.
Now, with his rage inflamed for his friend's death,
I fear he'll raze the walls against the will of fate."

 

  And with that command Zeus roused incessant battle.
Down the immortals launched to the field of action—
their warring spirits split the gods two ways.
Hera went to the massed ships with Pallas Athena,
Poseidon who grips the earth, and Hermes god of luck
who excels them all at subtle twists and tactics—
and the god of fire flanked them, seething power,
hobbling along but his shrunken legs moved nimbly.
But Ares swept down to the Trojans, helmet flashing,
and pacing him went Phoebus with long hair streaming
and Artemis showering arrows, Leto and River Xanthus
and goddess Aphrodite strong with eternal laughter.

 

  Now, while the gods had still kept clear of mortal men,
the Achaeans kept on gaining glory-great Achilles
who held back from the brutal fighting so long
had just come blazing forth. Chilling tremors
shook the Trojans' knees, down to the last man,
terrified at the sight: the headlong runner coming,
gleaming in all his gear, afire like man-destroying Ares.
But once the Olympians merged with mortal fighters,
Strife the mighty driver of armies rose in strength
and Athena bellowed her stunning war cry—standing now
at the edge of the deep-dug trench outside the rampart,
now at thundering cliffs she loosed her vibrant cry.
And Ares bellowed his cry from far across the lines,
churning black as a whirlwind, roaring down now
from the city's crest, commanding Trojans on and now
rushing along the Simois banks and scaling Sunlight Hill.

 

  So the blissful gods were rousing both opposing armies,
clashing front to front but then, in their own ranks,
their overpowering strife broke out in massive war.
Down from the high skies the father of men and gods
let loose tremendous thunder-from down below Poseidon
shook the boundless earth and towering heads of mountains.
The whole world quaked, the slopes of Ida with all her springs
and all her peaks and the walls of Troy and all Achaea's ships.
And terror-struck in the underworld, Hades lord of the dead
cringed and sprang from his throne and screamed shrill,
fearing the god who rocks the ground above his realm,
giant Poseidon, would burst the earth wide open now
and lay bare to mortal men and immortal gods at last
the houses of the dead—the dank, moldering horrors
that fill the deathless gods themselves with loathing.
So immense the clash as the war of gods erupted.
There, look, rearing against the lord Poseidon
Phoebus Apollo loomed, bristling winged arrows,
rearing against Ares, blazing-eyed Athena,
rearing against Hera, Artemis with arrow of gold

 


???
and cry that halloos' the hunt, the goddess raining shafts,
Huntress sister of Phoebus the distant deadly Archer—
rearing against Leto, Hermes the running god of luck
and against the Fire-god rose the great deep-swirling river
immortals call the Xanthus, mankind calls Scamander.

 

  So god went up against god. But blazing Achilles
strained to engage Prince Hector, plunge in battle
with him beyond all others—Achilles yearning now
to glut with Hector's blood, his, no other,
Ares who hacks at men behind his rawhide shield.
But Aeneas it was whom Phoebus, urger of armies,
filled with power now and drove against Achilles.
Phoebus, masking his voice like Priam's son Lycaon,
like him to the life the son of Zeus called out,
"Captain of Trojan councils—where have they gone,
those threats you made in your cups before the kings?
Boasting you'd face Achilles man-to-man in battle!"

 

  But Aeneas turned and gave the god an answer:
"Son of Priam, why press me to go against Achilles?
It's much against my will-his fury is overwhelming.
Nor would it be the first time I have had to face
the matchless, headlong runner. Once before
he chased me hard with his spear, down from Ida
the day he raided our flocks and sacked Lyrnessus,
Pedasus fort as well. But Zeus saved me then,
put force in my heart, spring in my racing knees.
Else I'd gone down at Achilles' hands, Athena's too—
the goddess sweeping before him lent the light of safety,
calling Achilles on that day with his bronze spear
to slaughter Leleges and Trojans. That is why
no mortal can fight Achilles head-to-head:
at every foray one of the gods goes with him,
beating back his death. Even without that power
his spear flies straight to the mark, never stops,
not till it bores clean through some fighter's flesh.
But if only Zeus would stretch the ropes of war dead even
the man would have no easy victory then, believe me—
not though he claims he's built of solid bronze!"

 

  Apollo son of Zeus encouraged him still more:
"Hero, why not invoke the deathless gods yourself?
They say you're a son of Aphrodite, Zeus's daughter,
but Achilles sprang from a lesser goddess' loins—
Aphrodite's a child of Zeus,
Thetis comes from the Old Man of the Sea.
So ram him straight on with your tough bronze!
Now—and not for a moment let him turn you back
with his stinging proud contempt and brazen threats!"

 

  That breathed enormous strength in the good captain—
right through the front he went, helmed in flashing bronze.
Nor did the white-armed Hera fail to see Anchises' son
advancing there through the press to face Achilles.
And rallying other gods around her, Hera shouted,
"Bend to the work, you two, Poseidon, Athena,
decide in your hearts how this assault will go!
Here comes Aeneas, look, helmed in flashing bronze
to oppose Achilles now and Phoebus speeds him on.
Come, spin him round in his tracks and drive him back.
That, or else one of us might stand beside Achilles
and lend him winning force-his courage must not flag.
Let him know he's loved by the greatest gods on high
while the gods who up till now have shielded Troy
from war and death are worthless as the wind!
We swept down from Olympus, all to join this fight
so Achilles might not fall at Trojan hands today.
Afterward he must suffer what the Fates spun out
on the doomed fighter's life line drawn that day
his mother gave him birth. If Achilles fails
to learn all this from our own immortal voices
he will quail when a god attacks him face-to-face.
The gods are hard to handle—
when they come blazing forth in their true power."

 

  But the god who grips the earth restrained the Queen:
"Hera, so hard, so senseless! Don't leap to extremes..
I, at least, have no real lust to drive our forces
against the gods of Troy. Our side is so much stronger.
Come now, let us move off and settle down together
far from the trampled field, take a lookout post
and leave the war to mortals . . .
But if Ares or Phoebus cares to start things off,
if they block Achilles and keep him out of action,
they will have a fight on their hands, then and there,
an all-out fight with us. But not for long, I trust—
they will soon break off and slink back to Olympus,
home to the gathered gods who wait their coming,
overwhelmed by the crushing power of our fists!"

 

  And with that threat the god of the sea-blue mane
led the way to the fortress raised for godlike Heracles:
earth piled on both sides, a high imposing breastwork
men of Troy and Pallas Athena flung up for the man
where he could race and escape that sea monster
whenever it charged him hard from shore to plain.
There Poseidon sat at ease with his deathless friends
who spread unbroken shrouds of mist around their shoulders,
while far on the other side the gods of Troy sat down
on the brows of Sunlight Hill, flanking you, Apollo,
god of the wild cry, and Ares scourge of cities.

 

  So either side of the lines they took positions,
weighing tactics, each Olympian force reluctant now
to launch out first on the wrenching horrors of war . . .
while Zeus on the heights sat poised to thunder orders.

 

  But the whole plain filled with men and flashed with bronze,
with troops and horse and beneath their feet the earth quaked
as armies rushed together. And now in the no man's land
two champions, greatest of all, strode and closed,
both men burning for battle,
Aeneas son of Anchises and brilliant Achilles.
Aeneas came up first with long, menacing strides,
head tossing his heavy helmet, his charging shield
thrust out to defend his chest, and shook his bronze spear.
But over against him came Achilles rearing like some lion
out on a rampage, and a whole town of men has geared
for the hunt to cut him down: but at first he lopes along,
all contempt, till one of the fast young hunters spears him—
then . . . crouched for attack, his jaws gaping, over his teeth
the foam breaks out, deep in his chest the brave heart groans,
he lashes his ribs, his flanks and hips with his tail,
he whips himself into fighting-fury, eyes glaring,
hurls himself head-on—kill one of the men or die,
go down himself at the first lethal charge!
So now magnificent pride and fury lashed Achilles
to go against Aeneas the greathearted fighter.
As they closed on each other, both in range,
the matchless runner Achilles opened up: "Aeneas—
why so far from your own ranks, standing all exposed?
Does your courage really drive you to challenge me?
In hopes of ruling your stallion-breaking friends
and filling Priam's throne? Even if you killed me,
would Priam drop his crown in your hands-for that?
The king has sons. He's sound of limb. No half-wit either.
Or have the Trojans sworn to carve you a fine estate?
The choicest land in the realm, rich in vineyards
and good tilled fields for you to lord it over—
if only you kill me!
Ah but I think you'll find the work quite taxing.
I seem to remember once before you fled my spear . . .
Or have you forgot the time I caught you all alone,
I cut you off from your flocks and sent you scurrying down
the slopes of Ida? Running for dear life, legs driving,
never a look behind. And you escaped that time,
you fled to Lyrnessus' walls, but at one charge
I sacked the place with Athena's help and Father Zeus,
I tore the day of freedom away from all the women,
dragged them off as slaves. Zeus saved you then
and other gods joined in. But he won't save you now,
I'd say—though the hope goes racing through your mind.
Go back to your own rank and file, I tell youl
Don't stand up against me—or you will meet your death.
Even a fool learns something once it hits him."

 

  But Aeneas, taking a long, deep breath, replied,
"Don't think for a moment, Achilles, son of Peleus,
you can frighten me with words like a child, a fool—
I'm an old hand myself at trading taunts and insults.
We both know each other's birth, each other's parents,
we've heard their far-flung fame on the lips of mortal men,
though you have never set eyes on mine, or I on yours.
They say you are Peleus' son, that fine, flawless man;
your mother, Thetis, sleek-haired child of the Sea.
And I am Aeneas, and I can boast Anchises' blood,
the proud Anchises, but my mother is Aphrodite.
Our parents—one pair or the other will mourn
a dear son today. Certain it is, I warn you,
we won't break off from battle and leave the field
with no more than a youngster's banter light as this.
But about my birth, if you'd like to learn it well,
first to last—though many people know it—
here's my story, Achilles . . .
Starting with Dardanus, Storm-king Zeus's son
who founded Dardania, long before holy Troy arose,
that city reared on the plain to shelter all our people.
They still camped on the slopes of Ida wet with springs.
Then Dardanus had a son in turn, King Erichthonius,
and he was the richest man in all the world—
three thousand mares he owned, grazing the marshes,
brood-mares in their prime, proud of their leaping foals.
And the North Wind, lusting once for the herd at pasture,
taking on the build of a black stallion, mounted several
and swelling under his force they bore him twelve colts.
And when they'd frisk on the tilled fields ripe with grain
they'd brush the crests of the corn and never snap a stalk,
but when they'd frisk and vault on the sea's broad back
they'd skim the crests of whitecaps glistening foam.
Now Erichthonius sired Tros, a lord of the Trojans,
and Tros, in turn, had three distinguished sons:
Ilus, Assaracus and Ganymede radiant as a god,
and he was the handsomest mortal man on earth—
and so the immortals, awestruck by his beauty,
snatched him away to bear the cup of Zeus
and pour out wine for all the deathless gods.
And Ilus, in turn, sired a valiant son Laomedon,
Laomedon had his sons as well, Tithonus and Priam,
Lampus and Clytius, Hicetaon the gallant aide of Ares.
and Assaracus fathered Capys, and he had a son Anchises
and Anchises fathered me, but Priam had Prince Hector.
There you have my lineage.
That is the blood I claim, my royal birth.
As for strength in war, Zeus lends power to some,
others he wastes away, whatever his pleasure—
the strongest god of all.
Come, Achilles,
no more bragging on this way like boys,
standing here in the thick of a pitched battle.
Plenty of insults we could fling against each other,
enough to sink a ship with a hundred benches!
A man's tongue is a glib and twisty thing . . .
plenty of words there are, all kinds at its command—
with all the room in the world for talk to range and stray.
And the sort you use is just the sort you'll hear.
What do we need with wrangling, hurling insults?
Cursing each other here like a pair of nagging women
boiling over with petty, heartsick squabbles, blustering
into the streets to pelt themselves with slander,
much of it true, much not. Anger stirs up lies.
I blaze for battle—your taunts can't turn me back,
not till we've fought it out with bronze. On with it—
taste the bite of each other's brazen spears!"
With that
he hurled a heavy lance at the great and awesome shield
and its massive surface clanged as it took the point.
Achilles had thrust it forth with his strong fist,
fearing staunch Aeneas' spear with its long shadow
would drive its whole length lightly through his buckler—
groundless fears. The fighter had no idea at all
that famous gifts of the gods do not break lightly,
can't be crushed when a mortal hand assails them.
So now not even seasoned Aeneas' heavy shaft
could smash Achilles' shield:
the gold blocked it, forged in the god's gift.
It did bore through two plies but three were left,
since the crippled Smith had made it five plies thick
with two of bronze on the outside, inside two of tin,
between them one of gold where the ashen spear held fast.

 

  Achilles next—he hurled his spear and its long shadow flew
and the weapon struck the balanced round shield of Aeneas
under the outer rim where the bronze ran thinnest,
backed by the thinnest bull's-hide. Straight through
the Pelian ash burst, the shield rang out with a screech—
but Aeneas crouched low, holding the buckler off his chest,
terrified as the shaft shot past his back, hurled so hard
it plunged deep in the ground, even after it tore up
two round plies of the shield that cased his body.
Dodging the big spear, Aeneas got to his feet . . .
a dizzying swirl of anguish rushing down his eyes,
blind with fear, the point had stuck so close.
But drawing his sharp sword, Achilles charged, wild,
hurtling toward him, loosing a savage cry as Aeneas
hefted a boulder in his hands, a tremendous feat—
no two men could hoist it, weak as men are now,
but all on his own he raised it high with ease.
Then and there he'd have struck Achilles lunging in,
the rock would have hit him square in casque or shield,
the gear would have warded off grim death, and Achilles, closing,
would have slashed his life away with a well-honed blade—
 


if the god of earthquakes had not marked it quickly
and called the gods at once who grouped around him:
"Now, I tell you, my heart aches for great Aeneas!
He'll go down to the House of Death this instant,
overwhelmed by Achilles—all because he trusted
the distant deadly Archer's urgings. Poor fool—
as if Apollo would lift a hand to save him now
from death, grim death. Aeneas the innocent!
Why should Aeneas suffer here, for no good reason,
embroiled in the quarrels of others, not his own?
He always gave us gifts to warm our hearts,
gifts for the gods who rule the vaulting skies.
So come, let us rescue him from death ourselves,
for fear the son of Cronus might just tower in rage
if Achilles kills this man. He is destined to survive.
Yes, so the generation of Dardanus will not perish,
obliterated without an heir, without a trace:
Dardanus, dearest to Zeus of all the sons
that mortal women brought to birth for Father.
Now he has come to hate the generation of Priam,
and now Aeneas will rule the men of Troy in power—
his sons' sons and the sons born in future years."

 

  But Hera the Queen broke in, her eyes open wide:
"Decide in your own mind, god of the earthquake,
whether to save Aeneas now or let him die,
crushed by Achilles, for all his fighting heart.
But time and again we two have sworn our oaths
in the eyes of all the gods—I and Pallas Athena—
never to drive the fatal day away from the Trojans,
not even when all Troy bums in the ramping flames
when the warring sons of Achaea burn her down!"

 

  As soon as he heard that, the god of earthquakes
surged through the clashing troops and raining spears
to reach the place where the two famed heroes fought.
Quickly he poured a mist across Achilles' eyes,
wrenched the spear from stalwart Aeneas' shield,
laid the bronze-shod ashen shaft at Achilles' feet
and hoisting Aeneas off the earth he slung him far . . .
And over the massing lines of men and massing chariots,
high in the air Aeneas vaulted, hurled by the god's hand
till he came to ground at the battle's churning flank
where Cauconian units braced themselves for action.
The god of the earthquake swept beside him there
and gave the man a burst of winging orders: "Aeneas—
what god on high commands you to play the madman?
Fighting against. Achilles' overwhelming fury!—
both a better soldier and more loved by the gods.
Pull back at once, whenever you're thrown against him—
or go down to the House of Death against the will of fate.
But once Achilles has met his death, his certain doom,
take courage then, go fight on the front lines then—
no other Achaean can bring you down in war."
With that,
with destiny made clear, he left him there on the spot
and turning back to Achilles quickly brushed away
the mist from his eyes, the magic, godsent haze.
And Achilles stared with all his might, dazzled,
disgusted too, and addressed his own great heart:
"Impossible—look, a marvel right before my eyes!
That spear I hurled is lying here on the ground.
That man—I cannot see him-—
the one I hurled at, wild to cut him down.
Ah, so the deathless gods must love Aeneas too.
And I thought his vaunts were empty, hollow boasting. _
Well let him go, I say! Never, never again
will he have the nerve to test my fighting power—
even now he was glad to save himself from death.
Now, quick, I'll marshal our battle-hungry Argives—
face the rest of the Trojans, test them, fight them down!"

 

  And back to the lines he leapt and urged each man,
"No more standing back from the Trojans, brave Achaeans!
Now fighter go against fighter, out for bloodshed!
It's hard for me, strong as I am, single-handed
to make for such a force and fight them all.
Why, not even Ares the deathless god of war,
not even Athena—for all their heavy labor—
could hack a passage through such jaws of battle.
But I—whatever fists and feet and strength can do,
that I will do, I swear, not hang back, not one inch.
Straight through enemy columns I go plowing now—
and no Trojan, I guarantee, will thrill with pleasure
once he meets my spearshaft head-to-head!"
Spurring his men
while Hector aflash in armor urged his Trojans—
thinking he'd even go up against Achilles:.
"No fear of Pelides now, my gallant Trojans!
I too could battle the deathless gods with words—
it's hard with a spear, the gods are so much stronger.
Not even Achilles can bring off all his boasts:
some he'll accomplish, some cut short, half done.
I'm off to engage the man, though his fists are fire,
though his fists are fire and his fury burnished iron!"

 


  Spurring them on to raise their spears for full assault
and the Trojans' fury massed and mounted, war cries broke
but Apollo suddenly stood by Hector, shouting,
"Don't for a moment duel Achilles, Hector,


out in front of your ranks!
Withdraw to your main lines and wait him there,
out of the crash of battle. Else he'll spear you down
or close for the kill and hack you with his sword."

 

  So Hector drew back to his thronging comrades,
terrified to hear the voice of god. Not Achilles—
armored in battle-power down he flung on the Trojans,
loosed barbaric cries, and his first kill was Iphition,
Otrynteus' hardy son and a chief of large contingents,
born of a river nymph to Otrynteus, scourge of towns,
below Tmolus' snows in the wealthy realm of Hyde . . .
As the Trojan charged head-on Achilles speared him
square in the brows—his whole skull split in half
and down he crashed, Achilles exulting over him:
"Here you lie, Otrynteus' son-most terrible man alive!
Here's your deathbed! Far from your birthplace, Gyge Lake
where your father's fine estate lies next to the Hyllus
stocked with fish and next to the whirling Hermus!"

 

  Vaunting over the dark that swept his quarry's eyes
and the running-rims of Argive war-cars cut him to shreds
at the onset's breaking edge. And next Achilles lunged
at Demoleon, son of Antenor, a tough defensive fighter—
he stabbed his temple and cleft his helmet's cheekpiece.
None of the bronze plate could hold it-boring through
the metal and skull the bronze spearpoint pounded,
Demoleon's brains splattered all inside his casque,
the Trojan beaten down in his fury. Hippodamas next,
he leapt from his chariot fleeing before Achilles—
Achilles' spearshaft rammed him through the back
and he gasped his life away, bellowing like some bull
that chokes and grunts when the young boys drag him round
the lord of Helice's shrine and the earthquake god
delights to see them dragging—so he bellowed now
and the man's proud spirit left his bones behind.
Achilles rushed with his spear at noble Polydorus
son of Priam. His father would not let him fight,
ever, he was the youngest-bom of all his sons—
Priam loved him most, the fastest runner of all
but now the young fool, mad to display his speed,
went dashing along the front to meet his death.
Just as he shot past the matchless runner Achilles
speared him square in the back where his war-belt clasped,
golden buckles clinching both halves of his breastplate—
straight on through went the point and out the navel,
down on his knees he dropped-—
screaming shrill as the world went black before him—
clutched his bowels to his body, hunched and sank.

 

  But Hector seeing his own brother Polydorus
clutching his entrails, sinking limp to the ground—
the mist came swirling down his eyes as well . . .
He could bear no more, wheeling off at a distance—
shaking his whetted spear he charged Achilles now,
coming fierce as fire but Achilles marked him quickly
and springing forth to take him, triumphed to himself,
"Here is the man who's raked my heart the most,
who killed my cherished comrade! No more delay,
dodging each other down the passageways of battle!"

 

  Under his brows he glared at royal Hector, shouting,
"Quick, charge me—the sooner to meet your death!"

 

  But Hector, his helmet flashing, never flinched:
"Don't think for a moment, Achilles, son of Peleus,
you can frighten me with words like a child, a fool—
I'm an old hand myself at trading taunts and insults.
Well I know you are brave, and I am far weaker.
True-but all lies in the lap of the great gods.
Weaker I am, but I still might take your life
with one hurl of a spear—my weapon can cut too,
long before now its point has found its mark!"
Grim reminder—
he brandished the shaft and hurled with all his might
but Athena blew it back from Achilles bent on glory—
a quick light breath and the shaft flew back again
to tall Prince Hector and fell before his feet.
Achilles blazed, charging, raging to cut him down,
loosing savage cries—but Phoebus whisked him away,
easy work for a god, and wrapped him round in mist.
Three times the brilliant runner Achilles charged him,
lunged with his bronze spear, three times he slashed at cloud—
then at Achilles' fourth assault like something superhuman
his terrifying voice burst out in winging words:
"Now, again, you've escaped your death, you dog,
but a good close brush with death it was, I'd sayl
Now, again, your Phoebus Apollo pulls you through,
the one you pray to, wading into our storm of spears.
We'll fight again—I'll finish you off next time
if one of the gods will only urge me on as well.
But now I'll go for the others, anyone I can catch."
Whirling
he stabbed Dryops, speared him right through the neck—
he dropped at his feet and Achilles left him dead
and smashed Demuchus' knee, Philetor's strapping son,
stopped him, right in his tracks with a well-flung spear
then sprang with his great sword and ripped his life away.
Then on he rushed at the sons of Bias—Laogonus, Dardanus—
hurled them off their chariot, slammed them both to ground,
one with a spear-thrust, one chopped down with a blade.
Then Tros, Alastor's son, crawled to Achilles' knees
and clutched them, hoping he'd spare him,
let Tros off alive, no cutting him down in blood,
he'd pity Tros, a man of his own age—the young fool,
he'd no idea, thinking Achilles could be swayed!
Here was a man not sweet at heart, not kind, no,
he was raging, wild—as Tros grasped his knees,
desperate, begging, Achilles slit open his liver,
the liver spurted loose, gushing with dark blood,
drenched his lap and the night swirled down his eyes
as his life breath slipped away.
And Mulius next—
he reared and jammed his lance through the man's ear
so the lance came jutting out through the other ear,
bronze point glinting.
Echeclus son of Agenor next—
Achilles split his head at the brow with hilted sword
so the whole blade ran hot with blood, and red death
came plunging down his eyes, and the strong force of fate.
Deucalion next—he lanced his arm with a bronze-shod spear,
he spitted the Trojan through where the elbow-tendons grip
and there he stood, waiting Achilles, arm dangling heavy,
staring death in the face—and Achilles chopped his neck
and his sword sent head and helmet flying off together
and marrow bubbling up from the clean-cut neckbone.
Down he went, his corpse full length on the ground—
just as Achilles charged at Piras' handsome son,
Rhigmus who'd sailed from the fertile soil of Thrace—
Achilles pierced his belly, the bronze impaled his guts
and out of his car he pitched as his driver Areithous
swung the horses round but Achilles speared his back
and the spearshaft heaved him off the chariot too
and the panicked stallions bolted.
Achilles now
like inhuman fire raging on through the mountain gorges
splinter-dry, setting ablaze big stands of timber,
the wind swirling the huge fireball left and right—
chaos of fire—Achilles storming on with brandished spear
like a frenzied god of battle trampling all he killed
and the earth ran black with blood. Thundering on,
on like oxen broad in the brow some field hand yokes
to crush white barley heaped on a well-laid threshing floor
and the grain is husked out fast by the bellowing oxen's hoofs—
so as the great Achilles rampaged on, his sharp-hoofed stallions
trampled shields and corpses, axle under his chariot splashed
with blood, blood on the handrails sweeping round the car,
sprays of blood shooting up from the stallions' hoofs
and churning, whirling rims—and the son of Peleus
charioteering on to seize his glory, bloody filth
splattering both strong arms, Achilles' invincible arms—

But once they reached the ford where the river runs clear,
the strong, whirling Xanthus sprung of immortal Zeus,
Achilles split the Trojan rout, driving one half
back toward the city, scattering up the plain
where Achaeans themselves stampeded off in terror
just the day before when Hector raged unchecked.
Now back in their tracks the Trojans fled pell-mell
while Hera spread dense cloud ahead to block their way.
But the other half were packed in the silver-whirling river,
into its foaming depths they tumbled, splashing, flailing—
the plunging river roaring, banks echoing, roaring back
and the men screamed, swimming wildly, left and right,
spinning round in the whirlpools. Spun like locusts
swarming up in the air, whipped by rushing fire,
flitting toward a river—the tireless fire blazes,
scorching them all with hard explosive blasts of flame
and beaten down in the depths the floating locusts huddle—
so at Achilles' charge the Xanthus' swirling currents
choked with a spate of horse and men—the river roared.

 

  And the god-sprung hero left his spear on the bank,
propped on tamarisks-in he leapt like a frenzied god,
his heart racing with slaughter, only his sword in hand,
whirling in circles, slashing-hideous groans breaking,
fighters stabbed by the blade, water flushed with blood.
Like shoals of fish darting before some big-bellied dolphin,
escaping, cramming the coves of a good deepwater harbor,
terrified for their lives—he devours all he catches—
so the Trojans down that terrible river's onrush
cowered under its bluffs. But soon as Achilles
grew arm-weary from killing, twelve young Trojans
he rounded up from the river, took them all alive
as the blood-price for Patroclus' death, Menoetius' son.
He dragged them up on the banks, dazed like fawns,
lashed their hands behind them with well-cut straps—
their own belts that cinched their billowing war-shirts—
gave them to friends to lead away to the beaked ships
and back he whirled, insane to hack more flesh.

 

  And first he met a son of Dardan Priam
just escaping the rapids—Lycaon, the very man
Achilles seized himself, once on a midnight raid,
and hauled from his father's orchard, resisting all the way.
He was pruning a young fig with his sharp bronze hook,
cutting green branches to bend for chariot-rails
when a sudden blow came down on him in the dark—
the grim marauder Achilles. That was the time
he shipped him to Lemnos fortress, sold him off
and the son of Jason paid the price for the slave,
but a stranger there released him from his chains,
Eetion out of Imbros paid a princely ransom
and sent him off to Arisbe's shining walls.so
From there he slipped away to his father's house,
struggling home from Lemnos, but only eleven days
he cheered his heart with friends. Then on the twelfth
some god cast him into Achilles' hands again
and now he would send him off on a new journey,
resisting all the way to the House of Death.
The swift runner recognized him at once
disarmed, no shield, no helmet, no spear left,
he'd scattered all his gear on the bank, sweating,
clambering out of the ford exhausted, knees buckling . . .
Achilles, filled with rage, addressed his own great heart:
"By heaven, an awesome miracle right before my eyes!
These gallant, die-hard Trojans, even those I've killed,
they'll all come rising back from the western gloom!
Look at this fellow here, back he comes again,
fleeing his fatal day—
and I'd sold him off as a slave in holy Lemnos
but the heaving gray salt sea can't hold him back,
though it stops whole fleets of men who buck its tides.
Let's try again—this time he'll taste my spearpoint.
Now we'll see, once and for all we'll know
if he returns as fast from his newest destination—
or the firm life-giving earth can hold him down,
the grave that hugs the strongest man alive."
Waiting,
plotting, the other stumbling toward him, stunned,
wild to grasp his knees, wild with all his heart
to escape his death and grueling black fate
as the great Achilles raised his massive spear,
wild to run him through—
He ducked, ran under the hurl
and seized Achilles' knees as the spear shot past his back
and stuck in the earth, still starved for human flesh.
And begging now, one hand clutching Achilles' knees,
the other gripping the spear, holding for dear life,
Lycaon burst out with a winging prayer: "Achilles!
I hug your knees—mercy!—spare my life!
I am your suppliant, Prince, you must respect me!
Yours was the first bread I broke, Demeter's gift,
that day you seized me in Priam's well-fenced orchard,
hauled me away from father, loved ones, sold me off
in holy Lemnos and I, I fetched you a hundred bulls—
and once released I brought three times that price.
And it's just twelve days that I've been home in Troy—
all I've suffered! But now, again, some murderous fate
has placed me in your hands, your prisoner twice over—
Father Zeus must hate me, giving me back to you!
Ah, to a short life you bore me, mother-mother,
she was Laothoe, aged Altes' daughter . . .
Altes who rules the Leleges always keen for war,
who holds the Pedasus heights along the Satniois—
and Priam wed his daughter, with many other wives, too
and she produced two sons, and you, you'll butcher both!
One you killed in the ranks of frontline fighters,
noble Polydorus, ran him down with your lance
and a gruesome death awaits me here and now—
no hope of escape for me, from your clutches,
not when destiny drives me up against you.
Listen, this too-take it to heart, I beg you—
don't kill me! I'm not from the same womb as Hector,
Hector who killed your friend, your strong, gentle friend!"

 

  So the illustrious son of Priam begged for life
but only heard a merciless voice in answer: "Fool,
don't talk to me of ransom. No more speeches.
Before Patroclus met his day of destiny, true,
it warmed my heart a bit to spare some Trojans:
droves I took alive and auctioned off as slaves.
But now not a single Trojan flees his death,
not one the gods hand over to me before your gates,
none of all the Trojans, sons of Priam least of all!
Come, friend, you too must die. Why moan about it so?
Even Patroclus died, a far, far better man than you.
And look, you see how handsome and powerful I am?
The son of a great man, the mother who gave me life
a deathless goddess. But even for me, I tell you,
death and the strong force of fate are waiting.
There will come a dawn or sunset or high noon
when a man will take my life in battle too—
flinging a spear perhaps
or whipping a deadly arrow off his bow."
At that
Lycaon's knees gave way on the spot, his heart too.
He let go of the spear, he sank back down . . .
spreading both arms wide. Drawing his sharp sword
Achilles struck his collarbone just beside the neck
and the two-edged blade drove home, plunging to the hilt—
and down on the ground he sprawled, stretched facefirst
and dark blood pouring out of him drenched the earth.
Achilles grabbed a foot, slung him into the river,
washed away downstream as he cried above him
savage words to wing him on his way: "There—
lie there! Make your bed with the fishes now,
they'll dress your wound and lick it clean of blood—
so much for your last rites! Nor will your mother
lay your corpse on a bier and mourn her darling son—
whirling Scamander will roll you down the sea's broad bosom!
And many a fish, leaping up through the waves, breaking
the cold ripples shivering dark will dart and bolt
Lycaon's glistening fat! Die, Trojans, die—
till I butcher all the way to sacred Troy—
run headlong on, I'll hack you from behind!
Nothing can save you now—
not even your silver-whirling, mighty-tiding river—
not for all the bulls you've slaughtered to it for years,
the rearing stallions drowned alive in its eddies . . . die!—
even so—writhing in death till all you Trojans pay
for Patroclus' blood and the carnage of Achaeans
killed by the racing ships when I was out of action!"

 

  The more he vaunted the more the river's anger rose,
churning at heart for a way to halt his rampage,
godlike Achilles, and stop the Trojans' rout.
But now Pelides shaking his long-shadowed spear
was charging Asteropaeus, mad to cut him down—
Pelegon's son, himself a son of the Axius River
broad and fast and Acessamenus' eldest daughter,
Periboea, loved by the deep-swirling stream.
Achilles went for Asteropaeus fresh from the ford,
braced to face him there and brandishing two spears
and the Xanthus filled the Trojan's heart with courage,
the river seething for all the youths Achilles slaughtered,
chopped to bits in its tide without a twinge of pity.
Closing against each other, just about in range,
the magnificent runner Achilles opened up,170
"Who on earth are you? Where do you hail from?—
you with the gall to go against my onslaught.
Pity the ones whose sons stand up to me in war!"

 

  But the noble son of Pelegon answered firmly,
"High-hearted son of Peleus, why ask about my birth?
I hail from Paeonia's rich soil, a far cry from here,
heading Paeonian troops with their long spears,
and this my eleventh day since raising Troy.
My birth? I come from the Axius' broad currents—
Axius floods the land with the clearest stream on earth
and Axius fathered the famous Spearman Pelegon.
Men say I am his son.
Now on with it, great Pelides, let us fight!"
Menacing so
as brilliant Achilles raised the Pelian ash spear
but the fighting Asteropaeus, quick, ambidextrous,
hurled both spears at once—one shaft hit the shield,
no breakthrough, the shaft could not smash through,
the gold blocked it, forged in the god's gift.
But the other grazed Achilles' strong right arm
and dark blood gushed as the spear shot past his back,
stabbing the earth hard, still lusting to sink in flesh . . .
But next Achilles, burning to cut down Asteropaeus
hurled his ashen shaft—it flew straight as a die
but a clean miss—it struck the river's high bank
and half the length of the lance stuck deep in soil.
So Achilles, drawing the sharp sword at his hip,
sprang at the man in rage as he tried to wrench
Pelides' spear from the bank but his grip failed.
Three times he tried to wrench it free, tugging madly,
thrice gave up the struggle—the fourth with all his might
he fought to bend Aeacides' shaft and break it off
but before it budged the hero was all over him,
slashing out his life, slitting his belly open—
a scooping slice at the navel and all his bowels
spilled out on the ground, darkness swirled his eyes
as he gasped his breath away. And trampling his chest
Achilles tore his gear off, glorying over him now:
"Lie there with the dead! Punishing work, you see,
to fight the sons of invincible Cronus' son,
even sprung from a river as you are! You- 210
you claimed your birth from a river's broad stream?
Well I can boast my birth from powerful Zeus himselfl
My father's the man who rules the hordes of Myrmidons,
Peleus, son of Aeacus, and Aeacus sprang from Zeus
and as Zeus is stronger than rivers surging out to sea,
so the breed of Zeus is stronger than any stream's.
Here is a great river flowing past you, look—
what help can he give you? Nonel
Nothing can fight the son of Cronus, Zeus,
not even Achelous king of rivers vies with Zeus,
not even the overpowering Ocean's huge high tides,
the source of all the rivers and all the seas on earth
and all springs and all deep wells—all flow from the ocean
but even the Ocean shrinks from the mighty Father's bolt
when terrible thunder crashes down the skies!"
With that
Achilles pulled his bronze spear from the river bluff
and left him there, the Trojan's life slashed out,
sprawled in the sand, drenched by the black tide—
eels and fish the corpse's frenzied attendants
ripping into him, nibbling kidney-fat away.
But Achilles went for Paeonians, helmets plumed,
still running in panic along the river's rapids
once they saw their finest fall in the onslaught,
beaten down by Pelides' hands and hacking sword.
He killed in a blur of kills—Thersilochus, Mydon,
Astypylus, Mnesus, Thrasius, Aenius and Ophelestes—
still more Paeonian men the runner would have killed
if the swirling river had not risen, crying out in fury,
taking a man's shape, its voice breaking out of a whirlpool:
"Stop, Achilles! Greater than any man on earth,
greater in outrage too—
for the gods themselves are always at your side!
But if Zeus allows you to kill off all the Trojans,
drive them out of my depths at least, I ask you,
out on the plain and do your butchery there.
All my lovely rapids are crammed with corpses now,
no channel in sight to sweep my currents out to sacred sea—
I'm choked with corpses and still you slaughter more,
you blot out more! Leave me alone, have done—
captain of armies, I am filled with horror!"

 

  And the breakneck runner only paused to answer,
"So be it, Scamander sprung of Zeus—as you command.
But I, I won't stop killing these overweening Trojans,
not till I've packed them in their walls and tested Hector,
strength against strength—he kills me or I kill him!"

 

Down on the Trojan front he swept like something superhuman
and now from his deep whirls the river roared to Phoebus,
"Disgrace—god of the silver bow and bom of Zeusl
You throw to the winds the will of Cronus' son—
time and again Zeus gave you strict commands:
Stand by the Trojan ranks and save their lives
till the sun goes down at last and darkness shrouds
the plowlands ripe with grain!"
When he heard that
Achilles the famous Spearman, leaping down from the bluff,
plunged in the river's heart and the river charged against him,
churning, surging, all his rapids rising in white fury
and drove the mass of corpses choking tight his channel,
the ruck Achilles killed-Scamander heaved them up
and bellowing like a bull the river flung them out
on the dry land but saved the living, hiding them down
the fresh clear pools of his thundering whirling current
but thrashing over Achilles' shoulders raised a killer-wave—
the tremendous thrust of it slammed against his shield
and he staggered, lost his footing, his arms flung out
for a tall strong elm, he clung but out it came by the roots,
toppling down, ripping away the whole cliff, blocking the stream
with a tangled snarl of branches crashing into it full length
to dam the river bank to bank-Bursting up from a whirlpool
Achilles dashed for the plain, his feet flying in terror
but the great god would not let up, hurling against him,
Scamander looming into a murderous breaker, dark, over him,
dead set on stopping the brilliant Achilles' rampage here
and thrusting disaster off the struggling Trojan force—
But the hero sprang away, far as a hard-flung spear,
swooping fast as the black eagle, the fierce marauder,
both the strongest and swiftest bird that flies the sky—
on he streaked and the bronze rang out against his chest,
clashing grimly—slipping out from under the wave he fled
with the river rolling on behind him, roaring, huge . . .
As a farmhand runs a ditch from a dark spring, sluicing
the gushing stream through plants and gardens, swinging
his mattock to knock the clods out down the shoot
and the water rushes on, tearing the pebbles loose
and what began as a trickle hits a quick slope and
down it goes, outstripping the man who guides it—
so the relentless tide kept overtaking Achilles,
yes, for all his speed—gods are stronger than men.
Again and again the brilliant swift Achilles whirled,
trying to stand and fight the river man-to-man and see
if all the immortal gods who rule the vaulting skies
were after him, putting him to rout-again and again
the mighty crest of the river fed by the rains of Zeus
came battering down his shoulders, down from high above
bi it Achilles kept on leaping, higher, desperate now
as the river kept on dragging down his knees, lunging
under him, cutting the ground from under hic legs . . .
Pelides groaned, scanning the arching blank sky:
"Father Zeus! To think in all my misery not one god
can bring himself to rescue me from this river!
Then I'd face any fate. And no god on high,
none is to blame so much as my dear mother—
how she lied, she beguiled me, she promised me
I'd die beneath the walls of the armored Trojans,
cut down in blood by Apollo's whipping arrows!
I wish Hector had killed me,
the best man bred in Troy-the killer a hero then
and a hero too the man whose corpse he stripped!
Now look what a wretched death I'm doomed to suffer,
trapped in this monstrous river like some boy, some pig-boy
swept away, trying to ford a winter torrent in a storm!"

 

  Quick to his cry Poseidon and Pallas moved in close,
stood at his shoulder now and taking human form,
grasped him hand-to-hand, spoke bracing words,
Poseidon who shakes the mainland first to say,
"Courage, Achilles! Why such fear, such terror?
Not with a pair like us to urge you on-gods-in-arms
sent down with Zeus's blessings, I and Pallas Athena.
It's not your fate to, be swallowed by a river:
he'll subside, and soon—you'll see for yourself.
But we do have sound advice, if only you will yield.
Never rest your hands from the great leveler war,
not till you pack and cram the Trojan armies tight
in the famous walls of Troy—whoever flees your onset.
But once you've ripped away Prince Hector's life,
back to the ships you go! We give you glory—
seize it in your hands!"
  With that challenge
both went soaring home to the deathless ones on high
but Achilles rampaged on with the gods' strong command
driving him down the plain where the river flooded now,
an immense, cresting outrush bursting with burnished gear
and troops of battle dead, men cut down in their prime,
floating corpses rolling-But Achilles surged on too
with high hurdling strides, charging against the river,
on, breakneck on and the river could not stop him,
not for all its reach and tide race, not with Athena
pumping enormous strength deep down Achilles' heart—
But the Xanthus River would not slack his fury .either,
he raged at Achilles all the more, he marshaled up
a mountainous ridge of water, roaring out to Simois,
"Oh dear brother, rise! Both of us rush together
to halt this mortal's onslaught! At any moment
he'll storm King Priam's mighty stronghold down—
the Trojans can't stand up to the man in battle.
Beat him back, quickly! Deluge all your channels
from all your gushing springs-muster all your torrents—
raise up a tremendous wave, rumbling, booming with timber,
boulders crashing—we'll stop this wild man in his tracks,
lording it in his power now and raging like some god!
Neither his strength nor splendid build can save him,
not now, I tell you—nor all that glorious armor:
now, somewhere under our floods that gear will sink,
immersed deep in slime, and I, I'll roil his body
round in sand and gravel, tons of spills of silt.
Achaeans will never know where to find his bones,
never collect them now—
I'll bury that man so deep in mud and rocks!
That's where his grave-mound will be piled and then
no need in the world to raise his barrow high
when comrades come to give him royal rites!"
So he vaunted,
rearing against Achilles, seething, heaving up in fury,
thundering out now in foam and blood and corpses—
the bloodred crest of the river swelled by Zeus
came arching higher, ready to tear Pelides down
but Hera, struck with fear for Achilles, screamed out,
dreading he might be swept away by the giant churning river
and quickly cried to the god of fire, her own dear son,
"To arms, my child—god of the crooked legs!
You are the one we'd thought a worthy match
for the whirling river Xanthus!
Quick, rescue Achilles! Explode in a burst of fire!
I'll drive the West and South Winds white with clouds
and sweep in from the open seas a tearing gale to sear
the Trojan bodies and gear and spread your lethal flames!
And you, you make for the Xanthus banks and burn the trees,
hurl the stream itself into conflagration—not for a moment
let him turn you back with his winning words or threats.
Never abate your fury! Not till I let loose my shout—
then halt your withering fire!"
Hera's command—
and Hephaestus launched his grim inhuman blaze.
First he shot into flames and burned the plain,
ignited hordes of corpses, squads Achilles slaughtered—
he scorched the whole plain and the shining river shrank.
Hard as the autumn North Wind hits a leveled field
just drenched in a downpour, quickly dries it off
and the fanner is glad and starts to till his soil—
so the whole plain was parched and the god of fire devoured
all the dead, then blazing in all his glory veered for the river—
an inferno—the elms burned, the willows and tamarisks burned
and the lotus burned and the galingale and reeds and rushes,
all that flourished along the running river's lush banks
and the eels writhed and fish in the whirlpools leapt high,
breaking the surface left and right in a sheen of fire,
gasping under the Master Smith Hephaestus' blast
and now the river's strength was burning out,
he panted the god's name: "Hephaestus—stop!
Not a single god can stand against you—no, not I—
can't fight such fire, such fury—hold your attack, stop!
Brilliant Achilles can drive them out of Ilium now!
What's this war to me? Why should I help Troy?"

 

  He screamed in flames, his clear currents bubbling up
like a cauldron whipped by crackling fire as it melts down
the lard of a fat swine, splattering up around the rim—
dry lpSs blazing under it, lashing it to the boil—
so the river burned, his clear currents seethed
and lost all will to flow. He stopped—overwhelmed
by the torrid blast of the Master Craftsman god of fire—
and Xanthus cried to Hera, pouring out his heart
in a flood of supplication, "Oh Hera—why?
Why does your son attack me, whip my waters more
than all the others? Why, what have I done to you?


Nothing beside those other powers, all who rush
to defend the Trojan armies. Oh I'll stop—
if that is your command—
but let your son stop too! I'll swear, what's more,
never to drive the fatal day away from the Trojans,
not even when all Troy burns in the ramping flames
when the warring sons of Achaea bum her down!"

 

  And Hera heard him, the radiant white-armed goddess
quickly cried to the god of fire, her own dear son,
"Hephaestus, stop! Stop, my glorious blazing boy!
It's not right to batter another deathless god,
not for the sake of these mortals."
She ceased
and the god of fire quenched his grim inhuman blaze
and back in its channel ran the river's glistening tides.

 

  And now with the strength of Xanthus beaten down
the two called off their battle. Hera held them back,
still enraged as she was. But now for total war,
bearing down on the other gods, disastrous, massive,
their fighting-fury blasting loose from opposing camps—
the powers collided! A mammoth clash—the wide earth roared
and the arching vault of heaven echoed round with trumpets!
And Zeus heard the chaos, throned on Olympus heights,
and laughed deep in his own great heart, delighted
to see the gods engage' in all-out conflict.
They did not waste a moment, closed at once—
Ares stabber of shields led off, charging Athena,
shaking his brazen spear and dressed the goddess down:
"You dog-fly, why drive the gods to battle once again
with that stormy bluster driving your wild heart?
Don't you recall the time you drove Tydides' son
to spear me through? In the eyes of all the world
you seized his lance and rammed it home yourself,
tearing into my rippling, deathless flesh—so now
I think I'll pay you back for all your outrage!"

 

  With that he stabbed at her battle-shield of storm,
its dark tassels flaring, packing tremendous force—
not even Zeus's lightning bolt can break its front.
Bloody Ares lunged at it now with giant lance
and Athena backed away, her powerful hand hefting
a boulder off the plain, black, jagged, a ton weight
that men in the old days planted there to mark off plowland—
Pallas hurled that boundary-stone at Ares, struck his neck,
loosed his limbs, and down he crashed and out over seven acres
sprawled the enormous god and his mane dragged in the dust,
his armor clashed around him. Athena laughed aloud,
glorying over him, winging insults: "Colossal fool—
it never even occurred to you, not even now
when you matched your strength with mine,
just how much greater I claim to be than you!
So now you feel the weight of your mother's curses—
Hera plotted against you, Hera up in arms
because you left the Achaean forces in the lurch
and rushed to defend these reckless, headlong Trojans!"

 

  Triumphant Athena turned her shining eyes away
and Aphrodite daughter of Zeus took Ares' hand
and led him off the field, racked with groans,
barely able to gather back his strength ...
But the white-armed Hera saw her move at once
and winged Athena on: "Just look at them there—
daughter of Zeus whose shield is storm and thunder,
tireless one, Athena. There she goes again,
that dog-fly, leading her man-destroying Ares'clear
of the rampage, through the slaughter! After her, quick!"

 

  Athena's heart leapt high, she charged at Aphrodite,
overtook her and beat her breasts with clenched fists.
Down she sank with Ares, resistance quite dissolved,
two immortals spread on the earth that rears us all
with Pallas trumpeting over them winged exultations:
"Down you go! May all the gods who help the Trojans
fall as hard when they battle Argives armed for war—
all as courageous, all as steadfast as Aphrodite
when she sped to Ares' side and faced my fury!
Then we'd have done with fighting long ago,
razed the rugged walls of Troy and laid her waste."

 

  So Athena vaunted and white-armed Hera smiled
but the mighty god of earthquakes challenged Phoebus:
"Apollo—why hold back from each other? It's not fair
when the other gods have launched themselves in war.
 


What disgrace for us—to return without a fight
to the bronze-floored house of Zeus on Mount Olympus!
You lead off. You are the younger-born, and I—
it's wrong for me, since I have years on you
and I know the world much better.
Fool, what short-lived memory you must have!
Don't you remember? Have you forgotten-even now?—
all those troubles we suffered here alongside Troy,
we alone of the gods when Zeus dispatched us down
to slave for proud Laomedon one whole year,
for stated wages—at that man's beck and call.
I erected the rampart round the Trojans' city,510
a massive ashlar wall to make the place impregnable.
You, Phoebus, herded his shambling crook-homed cattle
along the spurs of Ida's timbered ridges. Ah but then,
when the happy spring brought time for payment round,
that outrageous man Laomedon robbed us blind.
He stole our wages, cursed us, sent us packing—
he threatened to bind us both, hand and foot,
ship us off and away as slaves to distant islands—
he was all for lopping off our ears with a brazen ax!
So we made our way back home, hearts smoldering,
furious for the sum he swore but never paid—
and that, that is the one whose men you favor now.
No joining ranks with us as we fight to wipe them out,
these insolent Trojans, stretch them out in the dust
with all their sons and all their honored wives!"

 

  But the distant deadly Archer volleyed back,
"God of the earthquake—you'd think me hardly sane
if I fought with you for the sake of wretched mortals . . .
like leaves, no sooner flourishing, full of the sun's fire,
feeding on earth's gifts, than they waste away and die. 
Stop. Call off this skirmish of ours at once—
let these mortals fight themselves to death."

 

  With that he turned and left, filled with shame
to grapple his own father's brother hand-to-hand.
But his sister Artemis, Huntress, queen of beasts,
inveighed against him now with stinging insults:
"So, the deadly immortal Archer runs for dear life!—
turning over victory to Poseidon, total victory,
giving him all the glory here without a fight.
Why do you sport that bow, you spineless fool?—
it's worthless as the wind!
Don't let me hear you boast in Father's halls,
ever again, as you bra8Sed among the gods till now,
that you would fight Poseidon strength for strength."

 

  but Zeus's regal consort flew into rage at once
and her outburst raked the Huntress armed with arrows:
"How do you have the gall, you shameless bitch,
to stand and fight me here? You and your archery!
Zeus made you a lion against all women, true,
he lets you kill off mothers in their labor—
but you'll find it painful, matching force with me.
Better to slaughter beasts on rocky mountain slopes
and young deer in the wild than fight a higher goddess!
But since you'd like a lesson in warfare, Artemis,
just to learn, to savor how much stronger I am
when you engage my power-"
She broke off,
her left hand seizing both wrists of the goddess,
right hand stripping the bow and quiver off her shoulders—
Hera boxed the Huntress' ears with her own weapons,  
smiling broadly now as her victim writhed away
and showering arrows scattered. Bursting into tears
the goddess slipped from under her clutch like a wild dove
that flies from a hawk's attack to a hollow rocky cleft
for it's not the quarry's destiny to be caught—
so she fled in tears, her archery left on the spot.
But Hermes the guide of souls and giant-killer
reassured her mother, Leto, "Nothing to fear,
I'd never fight you, Leto. An uphill battle it is,
trading blows with the wives of Zeus who rules the clouds.
No, go boast to your heart's content and tell the gods
you triumphed over me with your superhuman power!"

 

  So Leto gathered the reflex bow and arrows
scattered left and right in the swirling dust,
and bearing her daughter's archery in her arms
withdrew from the field of battle trailing Artemis.
By now the Huntress had reached Olympus heights
and made her way to the bronze-floored house of Zeus.
And down she sat on her Father's lap, a young girl,
sobbing, her deathless robe quivering round her body.  
But her Father, son of Cronus, hugged her tight
and giving a low warm laugh inquired gently,
"Who has abused you now, dear child, tell me,
who of the sons of heaven so unfeeling, cruel?
Why, it's as if they had caught you in public,
doing something wrong . . . "
Wreathed in flowers
the one who halloos the hunt cried out at once,
"Your own wife, Father! The white-armed Hera beat me!
This strife, this warfare plaguing all the immortals—
Hera's all to blame!"

 

  And now as the powers. wrangled back and forth
the lord god Apollo entered holy Troy,
filled with dread for the city's sturdy walls:
what if the Argive forces stormed them down today—
against the will of fate? The rest of the gods
who live forever soon returned to Mount Olympus,
some enraged, some in their proud, new-won glory,
and sat beside the Father, king of the black cloud.
But Achilles slaughtered on and on, never pausing,
killing Trojans and skittish battle-teams at once.
As smoke goes towering into the broad vaulting sky
from a burning town and the gods' wrath drives it on,
dealing struggle to all, to many searing grief—
so Achilles dealt the Trojans struggle, grief.

 

  But there on the god-built heights stood aged Priam.
He saw the monstrous Achilles and racing on before him
Trojans whipped in headlong flight, all rescue gone.
The king cried out and clambered down to ground
from the high tower, issuing quick commands
to veteran gateway guards beside the walls:
"Spread the great gates wide—all hands now—
till our routed troops can straggle back to Troy!
Achilles swarms over them—they're stampeding,
a terrible mauling's coming . . . I can see it now!
Once they're packed in the walls and catch their breath,
close the thickset gates and bolt them tight again.
I dread this murderous man-he'll burst right through our walls."

 

  They spread the gates and rammed the doorbars back
and the spreading gates made way for a ray of hope
as Phoebus Apollo hurtled forth to meet Achilles,
to fight disaster off the Trojan troops.
Heading straight for the city's lofty ramparts,
ragged with thirst, choked with dust from the plain
they fled as Achilles stormed them, shaking his spear,
that wild rabid frenzy always gripping his heart,
blazing to seize his glory.
  And then and there
the Achaeans would have taken the lofty gates of Troy
if Apollo had not driven Prince Agenor at them,
Antenor's son, a courageous, rugged soldier.
He inspired his heart with daring, standing near—
in person, to beat away the dragging fates of death—
leaning against an oak, concealed in swirls of mist.
And now, as soon as Agenor saw Achilles coming,
there he stood, poised for the scourge of cities
while the heart inside him heaved like heavy seas.
Waiting, tense, he probed his own brave spirit:
"Ah dear god—if I run from Achilles' onslaught,
taking the route the rest have fled, stampeding,
he'll catch me even so and slash my coward's throat.
But if I leave my comrades panicked before his charge,
this Prince Achilles—slip away from the wall on foot
and race the other way, out to Ilium's plain and
reach the spurs of Ida, hide in the underbrush
and then, in the dying light . . .
once I've washed my sweat away in the river,
yes, I just might make it back again to Troy—
but why debate, my friend, why thrash things out?
God forbid that Achilles sees me turning tail,
heading from town and out to open country—
he'll come after me full tilt 'and run me downl
And then no way to escape my death, my certain doom—
Achilles is far too strong for any man on earth.
Wait . . . what if I face him out before the walls?
Surely his body can be pierced by bronze, even his—
he has only one life, and people say he's mortal:
it's only the son of Cronus handing him the glory."

 

  Filled with resolve, he braced, waiting Achilles,
his warrior blood incensed. He'd fight to the death
as a panther springs forth from her thicket lair
to stand and face the huntsman: no fear in her heart,
no thought of flight when she hears the baying packs—
and even if he's too quick with spear or lunging sword,
even if she's run through, she never slacks her fury
until she's charged him hard or gone down fighting.
And so the noble son of Antenor, brave Agenor
would never run until he'd tested Achilles.
He steadied his balanced shield before his chest,
aimed his spear at the man and flung this challenge:
"Surely you must have hoped with all your heart—
the great glorious Achilles—that you would raze
the proud Trojans' city this very day! You fool—
you still have plenty of pain to suffer for her sake.
We have fighting men by the hundreds still inside her,
forming a wall before our loving parents, wives and sons
to defend Troy—where you rush on to meet your doom,
headlong man as you are, breakneck man of war!"
 

  And he hurled his sharp spear from, a strong hand—
a hard true hit on Achilles' shin below the knee!
But the tin of the fire-new armor round his leg
let loose an unearthly ring—back the spear sprang
from the wondrous gear it struck, not punching through:
the gift of the god Hephaestus blocked its force.
Achilles next, he leapt at Prince Agenor—
but Phoebus refused to let him seize the glory—
he whisked Agenor off, wrapped in swirls of mist
and sped him out of the fighting safely on his way
and then with trickery kept Achilles off the Trojans.
True, just like Agenor head to foot the deadly Archer
stood in Achilles' path and Achilles sprang in chase,
feet racing, coursing him far across the wheat-fields,
heading him out toward Scamander's whirling depths
as the god led him a little, luring him on and on—
always hoping to catch the god with bursts of speed.
But all the while the rest of the Trojans fled en masse,
thrilled to reach the ramparts, crowding, swarming in,
no daring left to remain outside the city walls
and wait for each other, learn who made it through,
who died in battle-no, in a driving rout they came,
streaming into Troy,
any fighter whose racing legs could save his life.

So all through Troy the men who had fled tike panicked fawns
were wiping off their sweat, drinking away their thirst,
leaning along the city's massive ramparts now
while Achaean troops, sloping shields to shoulders,
closed against the walls. But there stood Hector,
shackled fast by his deadly fate, holding his ground,
exposed in front of Troy and the Scaean Gates.
And now Apollo turned to taunt Achilles:
"Why are you chasing me? Why waste your speed?—
son of Peleus, you a mortal and I a deathless god.
You still don't know that I am immortal, do you?—
straining to catch me in your fury! Have you forgotten?
There's a war to fight with the Trojans you stampeded,
look, they're packed inside their city walls,
but you, you've slipped away out here. You can't kill me—
I can never die-it's not my fate!"
Enraged at that,
Achilles shouted in mid-stride, "You've blocked my way,
you distant, deadly Archer, deadliest god of all—
you made me swerve away from the rampart there.
Else what a mighty Trojan army had gnawed the dust
before they could ever straggle through their gates!
Now you've robbed me of great glory, saved their lives
with all your deathless ease. Nothing for you to fear,
no punishment to come. Oh I'd pay you back
if I only had the power at my command!"

 

  No more words—he dashed toward the city,
heart racing for some great exploit, rushing on
like a champion stallion drawing a chariot full tilt,
sweeping across the plain in easy, tearing strides—
so Achilles hurtled on, driving legs and knees.

 

  And old King Priam was first to see him coming,
surging over the plain, blazing like the star
that rears at harvest, flaming up in its brilliance,—
far outshining the countless stars in the night sky,
that star they call Orion's Dog—brightest of all
but a fatal sign emblazoned on the heavens,
it brings such killing fever down on wretched men.
So the bronze flared on his chest as on he raced—
and the old man moaned, flinging both hands high,
beating his head and groaning deep he called,
begging his dear son who stood before the gates,
unshakable, furious to fight Achilles to the death.
The old man cried, pitifully, hands reaching out to him,
"Oh Hector! Don't just stand there, don't, dear child,
waiting that man's attack—alone, cut off from friends!
You'll meet your doom at once, beaten down by Achilles,
so much stronger than you—that hard, headlong man.
Oh if only the gods loved him as much as I do . . .
dogs and vultures would eat his fallen corpse at once!—
with what a load of misery lifted from my spirit.
That man who robbed me of many sons, brave boys,
cutting them down or selling them off as slaves,
shipped to islands half the world away . . .
ven now there are two, Lycaon and Polydorus—
I cannot find them among the soldiers crowding Troy,
those sons Laothoe bore me, Laothoe queen of women.
But if they are still alive in the enemy's camp,
then we'll ransom them back with bronze and gold.
We have hoards inside the walls, the rich dowry
old and famous Altes presented with his daughter.
But if they're dead already, gone to the House of Death,
what grief to their mother's heart and mine—we gave them life.
For the rest of Troy, though, just a moment's grief
unless you too are battered down by Achilles.
Back, come back! Inside the walls, my boy!
Rescue the men of Troy and the Trojan women—
don't hand the great glory to Peleus' son,
bereft of your own sweet life yourself.

 

Pity me too!—
still in my senses, true, but a harrowed, broken man
marked out by doom-past the threshold of old age . . .
and Father Zeus will waste me with a hideous fate,
and after I've lived to look on so much horror!
My sons laid low, my daughters dragged away
and the treasure-chambers looted, helpless babies
hurled to the earth in the red barbarity of war . . .
my sons' wives hauled off by the Argives' bloody hands!
And I, I last of all—the dogs before my doors
will eat me raw, once some enemy brings me down
with his sharp bronze sword or spits me with a spear,
wrenching the life out of my body, yes, the very dogs
I bred in my own halls to share my table, guard my gates—
mad, rabid at heart they'll lap their master's blood
and loll before my doors.
  Ah for a young man
all looks fine and noble if he goes down in war,
hacked to pieces under a slashing bronze blade—
he lies there dead . . . but whatever death lays bare,
all wounds are marks of glory. When an old man's killed
and the dogs go at the gray head and the gray beard
and mutilate the genitals—that is the cruelest sight
in all our wretched lives!"

 

So the old man groaned
and seizing his gray hair tore it out by the roots
but he could not shake the fixed resolve of Hector.
And his mother wailed now, standing beside Priam,
weeping freely, loosing her robes with one hand
and holding out her bare breast with the other,
her words pouring forth in a flight of grief and tears:
"Hector, my child! Look—have some respect for this!
Pity your mother too, if I ever gave you the breast
to soothe your troubles, remember it now, dear boy—
beat back that savage man from safe inside the walls!
Don't go forth, a champion pitted against him—
merciless, brutal man. If he kills you now,
how can I ever mourn you on your deathbed?—
dear branch in bloom, dear child I brought to birth!—
Neither I nor your wife, that warm, generous woman . . .
Now far beyond our reach, now by the Argive ships
the rushing dogs will tear you, bolt your flesh!"

 

  So they wept, the two of them crying out
to their dear son, both pleading time and again
but they could not shake the fixed resolve of Hector.
No, he waited Achilles, coming on, gigantic in power.
As a snake in the hills, guarding his hole, awaits a man—
bloated with poison, deadly hatred seething inside him,
glances flashing fire as he coils round his lair . . .
so Hector, nursing his quenchless fury, gave no ground,
leaning his burnished shield against a jutting wall,
but harried still, he probed his own brave heart:
"No way out. If I slip inside the gates and walls,
Polydamas will be first to heap disgrace on me—
he was the one who urged me to lead our Trojans
back to Ilium just last night, the disastrous night
Achilles rose in arms like a god. But did I give way?
Not at all. And how much better it would have been!
Now my army's ruined, thanks to my own reckless pride,
I would die of shame to face the men of Troy
and the Trojan women trailing their long robes . . .
Someone less of a man than I will say, 'Our Hector—
staking all on his own strength, he destroyed his army!'
So they will mutter. So now, better by far for me
to stand up to Achilles, kill him, come home alive
or die at his hands in glory out before the walls.
But wait—what if I put down my studded shield
and heavy helmet, prop my spear on the rampart
and go forth, just as I am, to meet Achilles,
noble Prince Achilles . . .
why, I could promise to give back Helen, yes,
and all her treasures with her, all those riches
Paris once hauled home to Troy in the hollow ships—
and they were the cause of all our endless fighting—
Yes, yes, return it all to the sons of Atreus now
to haul away, and then, at the same time, divide
the rest with all the Argives, all the city holds,
and then I'd take an oath for the Trojan royal council
that we will hide nothing! Share and share alike the hoards
our handsome citadel stores within its depths and—
Why debate, my friend? Why thrash things out?
I must not go and implore him. He'll show no mercy,
no respect for me, my rights-he'll cut me down
straight off—stripped of defenses like a woman
once I have loosed the armor off my body.
No way to parley with that man—not now—
not from behind some oak or rock to whisper,
like a boy and a young girl, lovers' secrets
a boy and girl might whisper to each other . . .
Better to clash in battle, now, at once—
see which fighter Zeus awards the glory!"
  So he wavered,
waiting there, but Achilles was closing on him now
like the god of war, the fighter's helmet flashing,
over his right shoulder shaking the Pelian ash spear,
that terror, and the bronze around his body flared
like a raging fire or the rising, blazing sun.
Hector looked up, saw him, started to tremble,
nerve gone, he could hold his ground no longer,
he left the gates behind and away he fled in fear—
and Achilles went for him, fast, sure of his speed
as the wild mountain hawk, the quickest thing on wings,
launching smoothly, swooping down on a cringing dove
and the dove flits out from under, the hawk screaming
over the quarry, plunging over and over, his fury
driving him down to beak and tear his kill—
so Achilles flew at him, breakneck on in fury
with Hector fleeing along the walls of Troy,
fast as his legs would go. On and on they raced,
passing the lookout point, passing the wild fig tree
tossed by the wind, always out from under the ramparts
down the wagon trail they careered until they reached
the clear running springs where whirling Scamander
rises up from its double wellsprings bubbling strong—
and one runs hot and the steam goes up around it,
drifting thick as if fire burned at its core
but the other even in summer gushes cold
as hail or freezing snow or water chilled to ice . . .
And here, close to the springs, lie washing-pools
scooped out in the hollow rocks and broad and smooth
where the wives of Troy and all their lovely daughters
would wash their glistening robes in the old days,
the days of peace before the sons of Achaea came . . .
Past these they raced, one escaping, one in pursuit
and the one who fled was great but the one pursuing
greater, even greater—their pace mounting in speed
since both men strove, not for a sacrificial beast
or oxhide trophy, prizes runners fight for, no,
they raced for the life of Hector breaker of horses.
Like powerful stallions sweeping round the post for trophies,
galloping full stretch with some fine prize at stake,
a tripod, say, or woman offered up at funeral games
for some brave hero fallen—so the two of them
whirled three times around the city of Priam,
sprinting at top speed while all the gods gazed down,
and the father of men and gods broke forth among them now:
"Unbearable—a man I love, hunted round his own city walls
and right before my eyes. My heart grieves for Hector.
Hector who burned so many oxen in my honor, rich cuts,
now on the rugged crests of Ida, now on Ilium's heights.
But now, look, brilliant Achilles courses him round
the city of Priam in all his savage, lethal speed.
Come, you immortals, think this through. Decide.
Either we pluck the man from death and save his life
or strike him down at last, here at Achilles' hands—
for all his fighting heart."
  But immortal Athena,
her gray eyes wide, protested strongly: "Father!
Lord of the lightning, king of the black cloud,
what are you saying? A man, a mere mortal,
his doom sealed long ago? You'd set him free
from all the pains of death?
  Do as you please—
but none of the deathless gods will ever praise you."

 

  And Zeus who marshals the thunderheads replied,
"Courage, Athena, third-born of the gods, dear child.
Nothing I said was meant in earnest, trust me,
I mean you all the good will in the world. Go.
Do as your own impulse bids you. Hold back no more."

 

  So he launched Athena already poised for action—
down the goddess swept from Olympus' craggy peaks.

 

  And swift Achilles kept on coursing Hector, nonstop
as a hound in the mountains starts a fawn from its lair,
hunting him down the gorges, down the narrow glens
and the fawn goes to ground, hiding deep in brush
but the hound comes racing fast, nosing him out
until he lands his kill. So Hector could never throw
Achilles off his trail, the swift racer Achilles—
time and again he'd make a dash for the Dardan Gates,
trying to rush beneath the rock-built ramparts, hoping
men on the heights might save him, somehow, raining spears
but time and again Achilles would intercept him quickly,
heading him off, forcing him out across the plain
and always sprinting along the city side himself—
endless as in a dream . . .
when a man can't catch another fleeing on ahead
and he can never escape nor his rival overtake him—
so the one could never run the other down in his speed
nor the other spring away. And how could Hector have fled
the fates of death so long? How unless one last time,
one final time Apollo had swept in close beside him,
driving strength in his legs and knees to race the wind?
And brilliant Achilles shook his head at the armies,
never letting them hurl their sharp spears at Hector—
someone might snatch the glory, Achilles come in second.
But once they reached the springs for the fourth time,
then Father Zeus held out his sacred golden scales:
in them he placed two fates of death that lays men low—
one for Achilles, one for Hector breaker of horses—
and gripping the beam mid-haft the Father raised it high
and down went Hector's day of doom, dragging him down
to the strong House of Death—and god Apollo left him.
Athena rushed to Achilles, her bright eyes gleaming,
standing shoulder-to-shoulder, winging orders now:
"At last our hopes run high, my brilliant Achilles—
Father Zeus must love you—
we'll sweep great glory back to Achaea's fleet,
we'll kill this Hector, mad as he is for battle!
No way for him to escape us now, no longer—
not even if Phoebus the distant deadly Archer
goes through torments, pleading for Hector's life,
groveling over and over before our storming Father Zeus.
But you, you hold your ground and catch your breath,
while I run Hector down and persuade the man
to fight you face-to-face."
  So Athena commanded
and he obeyed, rejoicing at heart—Achilles stopped,
leaning against his ashen spearshaft barbed in bronze.
And Athena left him there, caught up with Hector at once,
and taking the build and vibrant voice of Deiphobus
stood shoulder-to-shoulder with him, winging orders:
"Dear brother, how brutally swift Achilles hunts you—
coursing you round the city of Priam in all his lethal speed!
Come, let us stand our ground together—beat him back."

 

  "Deiphobus!"—Hector, his helmet flashing, called out to her"—
dearest of all my brothers, all these warring years,
of all the sons that Priam and Hecuba produced!
Now I'm determined to praise you all the more,
you who dared—seeing me in these straits—
to venture out from the walls, all for my sake,
while the others stay inside and cling to safety."

 

  The goddess answered quickly, her eyes blazing,
"True, dear brother—how your father and mother both
implored me, time and again, clutching my knees,
and the comrades round me begging me to stay!
Such was the fear that broke them, man for man,
but the heart within me broke with grief for you.
Now headlong on and fight! No letup, no lance spared!
So now, now we'll see if Achilles kills us both
and hauls our bloody armor back to the beaked ships
or he goes down in pain beneath your spear."

 

  Athena luring him on with all her immortal cunning—
and now, at last, as the two came closing for the kill
it was tall Hector, helmet flashing, who led off:
"No more running from you in fear, Achilles!
Not as before. Three times I fled around
the great city of Priam—I lacked courage then
to stand your onslaught. Now my spirit stirs me
to meet you face-to-face. Now kill or be killed!
Come, we'll swear to the gods, the highest witnesses—
the gods will oversee our binding pacts. I swear
I will never mutilate you—merciless as you are—
if Zeus allows me to last it out and tear your life away.
But once I've stripped your glorious armor, Achilles,
I will give your body back to your loyal comrades.
Swear you'll do the same."
  A swift dark glance
and the headstrong runner answered, "Hector, stop!
You unforgivable, you . . . don't talk to me of pacts.
There are no binding oaths between men and lions—
wolves and lambs can enjoy no meeting of the minds—
they are all bent on hating each other to the death.
So with you and me. No love between us. No truce
till one or the other falls and gluts with blood
Ares who hacks at men behind his rawhide shield.
Come, call up whatever courage you can muster.
Life or death—now prove yourself a spearman,
a daring man of war! No more escape for you—
Athena will kill you with my spear in just a moment.
Now you'll pay at a stroke for all my comrades' grief,
all you killed in the fury of your spear!"
With that,
shaft poised, he hurled and his spear's long shadow flew
but seeing it coming glorious Hector ducked away,
crouching down, watching the bronze tip fly past
and stab the earth—but Athena snatched it up
and passed it back to Achilles
and Hector the gallant captain never saw her.
He sounded out a challenge to Peleus' princely son:
"You missed, look—the great godlike Achilles!
So you knew nothing at all from Zeus about my death—
and yet how sure you were! All bluff, cunning with words,
that's all you are—trying to make me fear you,
lose my nerve, forget my fighting strength.
Well, you'll never plant your lance in my back
as I flee you in fear—plunge it through my chest
as I come charging in, if a god gives you the chance!
But now it's for you to dodge my brazen spear—
I wish you'd bury it in your body to the hilt.
How much lighter the war would be for Trojans then
if you, their greatest scourge, were dead and gone!"

 

  Shaft poised, he hurled and his spear's long shadow flew
and it struck Achilles' shield—a dead-center hit—
but off and away it glanced and Hector seethed,
his hurtling spear, his whole arm's power poured
in a wasted shot. He stood there, cast down . . .
he had no spear in reserve. So Hector shouted out
to Deiphobus bearing his white shield—with a ringing shout
he called for a heavy lance—
  but the man was nowhere near him,
vanished—
 yes and Hector knew the truth in his heart
and the fighter cried aloud, "My time has come!
At last the gods have called me down to death.
I thought he was at my side, the hero Deiphobus—
he's safe inside the walls, Athena's tricked me blind.
And now death, grim death is looming up beside me,
no longer far away. No way to escape it now. This,
this was their pleasure after all, sealed long ago—
Zeus and the son of Zeus, the distant deadly Archer—
though often before now they rushed to my defense.
So now I meet my doom. Well let me die—
but not without struggle, not without glory, no,
in some great clash of arms that even men to come
will hear of down the years!"
  And on that resolve
he drew the whetted sword that hung at his side,
tempered, massive, and gathering all his force
he swooped like a soaring eagle
launching down from the dark clouds to earth
to snatch some helpless lamb or trembling hare.
So Hector swooped now, swinging his whetted sword
and Achilles charged too, bursting with rage, barbaric,
guarding his chest with the well-wrought blazoned shield,
head tossing his gleaming helmet, four horns strong
and the golden plumes shook that the god of fire
drove in bristling thick along its ridge.
Bright as that star amid the stars in the night sky,
star of the evening, brightest star that rides the heavens,
so fire flared from the sharp point of the spear Achilles
brandished high in his right hand, bent on Hector's death,
scanning his splendid body—where to pierce it best?
The rest of his flesh seemed all encased in armor,
burnished, brazen—Achilles' armor that Hector stripped
from strong Patroclus when he killed him—true,
but one spot lay exposed,
where collarbones lift the neckbone off the shoulders,
the open throat, where the end of life comes quickest—there
as Hector charged in fury brilliant Achilles drove his spear
and the point went stabbing clean through the tender neck
but the heavy bronze weapon failed to slash the windpipe—
Hector could still gasp out some words, some last reply . . .
he crashed in the dust—
godlike Achilles gloried over him:
"Hector—surely you thought when you stripped Patroclus' armor
that you, you would be safe! Never a fear of me—
far from the fighting as I was—you fool!
Left behind there, down by the beaked ships
his great avenger waited, a greater man by far—
that man was I, and I smashed your strength! And you—
the dogs and birds will maul you, shame your corpse
while Achaeans bury my dear friend in glory!"

 

  Struggling for breath, Hector, his helmet flashing,
said, "I beg you, beg you by your life, your parents—
don't let the dogs devour me by the Argive ships!
Wait, take the princely ransom of bronze and gold,
the gifts my father and noble mother will give you—
but give my body to friends to carry home again,
so Trojan men and Trojan women can do me honor
with fitting rites of fire once t am dead."

 

  Staring grimly, the proud runner Achilles answered,
"Beg no more, you fawning dog—begging me by my parents!
Would to god my rage, my fury would drive me now
to hack your flesh away and eat you raw—
such agonies you have caused me! Ransom?
No man alive could keep the dog-packs off you,
not if they haul in ten, twenty times that ransom
and pile it here before me and promise fortunes more—
no, not even if Dardan Priam should offer to weigh out
your bulk in gold! Not even then will your noble mother
lay you on your deathbed, mourn the son she bore . . .
The dogs and birds will rend you—blood and bone!"

 

  At the point of death, Hector, his helmet flashing,
said, "I know you well—I see my fate before me.
Never a chance that I could win you over . . .
Iron inside your chest, that heart of yours.
But now beware, or my curse will draw god's wrath
upon your head, that day when Paris and lord Apollo—
for all your fighting heart—destroy you at the Scaean Gates!"

 

  Death cut him short. The end closed in around him.
Flying free of his limbs
his soul went winging down to the House of Death,
wailing his fate, leaving his manhood far behind,
his young and supple strength. But brilliant Achilles
taunted Hector's body, dead as he was, "Die, die!
For my own death, I'll meet it freely—whenever Zeus
and the other deathless gods would like to bring it on!"

 

  With that he wrenched his bronze spear from the corpse,
laid it aside and ripped the bloody armor off the back.
And the other sons of Achaea, running up around him,
crowded closer, all of them gazing wonder-struck
at the build and marvelous, lithe beauty of Hector.
And not a man came forward who did not stab his body,
glancing toward a comrade, laughing: "Ah, look here—
how much softer he is to handle now, this Hector,
than when he gutted our ships with roaring fire!"

 

  Standing over him, so they'd gloat and stab his body.
But once he had stripped the corpse the proud runner Achilles
took his stand in the midst of all the Argive troops
and urged them on with a flight of winging orders:
"Friends—lords of the Argives, O my captains!
Now that the gods have let me kill this man
who caused us agonies, loss on crushing loss—
more than the rest of all their men combined—
come, let us ring their walls in armor, test them,
see what recourse the Trojans still may have in mind.
Will they abandon the city heights with this man fallen?
Or brace for a last, dying stand though Hector's gone?
But wait—what am I saying? Why this deep debate?
Down by the ships a body lies unwept, unburied—
Patroclus . . . I will never forget him,
not as long as I'm still among the living
and my springing knees will lift and drive me on.
Though the dead forget their dead in the House of Death,
I will remember, even there, my dear companion.
Now,
come, you sons of Achaea, raise a song of triumph!
Down to the ships we march and bear this corpse on high—
we have won ourselves great glory. We have brought
magnificent Hector down, that man the Trojans
glorified in their city like a god!"
So he triumphed
and now he was bent on outrage, on shaming noble Hector.
Piercing the tendons, ankle to heel behind both feet,
he knotted straps of rawhide through them both,
lashed them to his chariot, left the head to drag
and mounting the car, hoisting the famous arms aboard,
he whipped his team to a run and breakneck on they flew,
holding nothing back. And a thick cloud of dust rose up
from the man they dragged, his dark hair swirling round
that head so handsome once, all tumbled low in the dust—
since Zeus had given him over to his enemies now
to be defiled in the land of his own fathers.

 

  So his whole head was dragged down in the dust.
And now his mother began to tear her hair . . .
she flung her shining veil to the ground and raised
a high, shattering scream, looking down at her son.
Pitifully his loving father groaned and round the king
his people cried with grief and wailing seized the city—
for all the world as if all Troy were torched and smoldering
down from the looming brows of the citadel to her roots.
Priam's people could hardly hold the old man back,
frantic, mad to go rushing out the Dardan Gates.
He begged them all, groveling in the filth,
crying out to them, calling each man by name,
"Let go, my friends! Much as you care for me,
let me hurry out of the city, make my way,
all on my own, to Achaea's waiting ships!
I must implore that terrible, violent man . . .
Perhaps—who knows?—he may respect my age,
may pity an old man. He has a father too,
as old as I am—Peleus sired him once,
Peleus reared him to be the scourge of Troy
but most of all to me-he made my life a hell.
So many sons he slaughtered, just coming into bloom . . .
but grieving for all the rest, one breaks my heart
the most and stabbing grief for him will take me down to Death—
my Hector—would to god he had perished in my arms!
Then his mother who bore him—oh so doomed,
she and I could glut ourselves with grief."

 

  So the voice of the king rang out in tears,
the citizens wailed in answer, and noble Hecuba
led the wives of Troy in a throbbing chant of sorrow:
"O my child—my desolation! How can I go on living?
What agonies must I suffer now, now you are dead and gone?
You were my pride throughout the city night and day—
a blessing to us all, the men and women of Troy:
throughout the city they saluted you like a god.
You, you were their greatest glory while you lived—
now death and fate have seized you, dragged you down!"

 

  Her voice rang out in tears, but the wife of Hector
had not heard a thing. No messenger brought the truth
of how her husband made his stand outside the gates.
She was weaving at her loom, deep in the high halls,
working flowered braiding into a dark red folding robe.
And she called her well-kempt women through the house
to set a large three-legged cauldron over the fire
so Hector could have his steaming hot bath
when he came home from battle—poor woman,
she never dreamed how far he was from bathing,
struck down at Achilles' hands by blazing-eyed Athena.
But she heard the groans and wails of grief from the rampart now
and her body shook, her shuttle dropped to the ground,
she called out to her lovely waiting women, "Quickly—
two of you follow me—I must see what's happened.
That cry—that was Hector's honored mother I heard!
My heart's pounding, leaping up in my throat,
the knees beneath me paralyzed—Oh I know it . . .
something terrible's coming down on Priam's children.
Pray god the news will never reach my ears!
Yes but I dread it so—what if great Achilles
has cut my Hector off from the city, daring Hector,
and driven him out across the plain, and all alone?—
He may have put an end to that fatal headstrong pride
that always seized my Hector—never hanging back
with the main force of men, always charging ahead,
giving ground to no man in his fury!"
So she cried,
dashing out of the royal halls like a madwoman,
her heart racing hard, her women close behind her.
But once she reached the tower where soldiers massed
she stopped on the rampart, looked down and saw it all—
saw him dragged before the city, stallions galloping,
dragging Hector back to Achaea's beaked warships—
ruthless work. The world went black as night
before her eyes, she fainted,
falling backward, gasping away her life breath . . .
She flung to the winds her glittering headdress,
the cap and the coronet, braided band and veil,
all the regalia golden Aphrodite gave her once,
the day that Hector, helmet aflash in sunlight,
led her home to Troy from her father's house
with countless wedding gifts to win her heart.
But crowding round her now her husband's sisters
and brothers' wives supported her in their midst,
and she, terrified, stunned to the point of death,
struggling for breath now and coming back to life,
burst out in grief among the Trojan women: "O Hector—
I am destroyed! Both born to the same fate after all!
You, you at Troy in the halls of King Priam—
I at Thebes, under the timberline of Placos,
Eetion's house . . . He raised me as a child,
that man of doom, his daughter just as doomed—
would to god he'd never fathered me!
  Now you go down
to the House of Death, the dark depths of the earth,
and leave me here to waste away in grief, a widow
lost in the royal halls—and the boy only a baby,
the son we bore together, you and I so doomed.
Hector, what help are you to him, now you are dead?—
what help is he to you? Think, even if he escapes
the wrenching horrors of war against the Argives,
pain and labor will plague him all his days to come.
Strangers will mark his lands off, stealing his estates.
The day that orphans a youngster cuts him off from friends.
And he hangs his head low, humiliated in every way . . .
his cheeks stained with tears, and pressed by hunger
the boy goes up to his father's old companions,
tugging at one man's cloak, another's tunic,
and some will pity him, true,
and one will give him a little cup to drink,
enough to wet his lips, not quench his thirst.
But then some bully with both his parents living
beats him from the banquet, fists and abuses flying:
'You, get out—you've got no father feasting with us here!'
And the boy, sobbing, trails home to his widowed mother . . .
Astyanax!
And years ago, propped on his father's knee,
he would only eat the marrow, the richest cuts of lamb,
and when sleep came on him and he had quit his play,
cradled warm in his nurse's arms he'd drowse off,
snug in a soft bed, his heart brimmed with joy.
Now what suffering, now he's lost his father—
Astyanax!
The Lord of the City, so the Trojans called him,
because it was you, Hector, you and you alone
who shielded the gates and the long walls of Troy.
But now by the beaked ships, far from your parents,
glistening worms will wriggle through your flesh,
once the dogs have had their fill of your naked corpse—
though we have such stores of clothing laid up in the halls,
fine things, a joy to the eye, the work of women's hands.
Now, by god, I'll bum them all, blazing to the skies!
No use to you now, they'll never shroud your body—
but they will be your glory
burned by the Trojan men and women in your honor!"

 

  Her voice rang out in tears and the women wailed in answer.

So they grieved at Troy while Achaea's troops pulled back.
Once they reached the warships moored at the Hellespont
the contingents scattered, each man to his own ship,
but Achilles still would not dismiss his Myrmidons,
he gave his battle-loving comrades strict commands:
"Charioteers in fast formation—friends to the death!
We must not loose our teams from the war-cars yet.
All in battle-order drive them past Patroclus—
a cortege will mourn the man with teams and chariots.
These are the solemn honors owed the dead. And then,
after we've eased our hearts with tears and dirge,
we free the teams and all take supper here."
All as one
the armies cried out in sorrow, and Achilles led the chant.
Three times they drove their full-maned stallions round the body,
Myrmidon soldiers mourning, and among them Thetis stirred
a deep desire to grieve. And the sands grew wet,
the armor of fighting men grew wet with tears,
such bitter longing he roused . . .
Patroclus, that terror who routed Trojans headlong.
Achilles led them now in a throbbing chant of sorrow,
laying his man-killing hands on his great friend's chest:
"Farewell, Patroclus, even there in the House of Death!
Look—all that I promised once I am performing now:
I've dragged Hector here for the dogs to rip him raw—
and here in front of your flaming pyre I'll cut the throats
of a dozen sons of Troy in all their shining glory,
venting my rage on them for your destruction!"
So he triumphed
and again he was bent on outrage, on shaming noble Hector—
he flung him facedown in the dust beside Patroclus' bier.
And down to the last unit all eased off their armor,
fine burnished bronze, and released their neighing teams
and took their seats by the swift runner Achilles' ship,
Myrmidons in their thousands, and he set before them all
a handsome funeral feast to meet their hearts' desire.
And many pale-white oxen sank on the iron knife,
gasping in slaughter, many sheep and bleating goats
and droves of swine with their long glinting tusks,


succulent, rich with fat. They singed the bristles,
splaying the porkers out across Hephaestus' fire
then poured the blood in cupfuls all around the corpse.

 

  But now their commander, swift Achilles was led away
by Achaea's kings, barely able to bring him round—
still raging for his friend-to feast with Agamemnon.
As soon as the party reached the warlord's tents
they ordered the clear-voiced heralds straightaway
to set a large three-legged cauldron over the fire,
still in hopes of inducing Peleus' royal son
to wash the clotted bloodstains from his body.
He spurned their offer, firmly, even swore an oath:
"No, no, by Zeus-by the highest, greatest god!
It's sacrilege for a single drop to touch my head
till I place Patroclus on his pyre and heap his mound
and cut my hair for him—for a second grief this harsh
will never touch my heart while I am still among the living .. .
But now let us consent to the feasting that I loathe.
And at daybreak, marshal Agamemnon, rouse your troops
to fell and haul in timber, and furnish all that's fitting,
all the dead man needs for his journey down the western dark.
Then, by heaven, the tireless fire can strike his corpse—
the sooner to bum Patroclus from our sight—
and the men turn back to battles they must wage."

 

  So he insisted. They hung on his words, complied,
rushed to prepare the meal, and each man feasted well
and no man's hunger lacked a share of the banquet.
When they had put aside desire.for food and drink
each went his way and slept in his own shelter.
But along the shore as battle lines of breakers
crashed and dragged, Achilles lay down now,
groaning deep from the heart,
near his Myrmidon force but alone on open ground
where over and over rollers washed along the shore.
No sooner had sleep caught him, dissolving all his grief
as mists of refreshing slumber poured around him there—
his powerful frame was bone-weary from charging Hector
straight and hard to the walls of windswept Troy—
than the ghost of stricken Patroclus drifted up . . .
He was like the man to the life, every feature,
the same tall build and the fine eyes and voice
and the very robes that used to clothe his body.
Hovering at his head the phantom rose and spoke:
"Sleeping, Achilles? You've forgotten me, my friend.
You never neglected me in life, only now in death.
Bury me, quickly—et me pass the Gates of Hades.
They hold me off at a distance, all the souls,
the shades of the burnt-out, breathless dead,
never to let me cross the river, mingle with them . . .
They leave me to wander up and down, abandoned, lost
at the House of Death with the all-embracing gates.
Oh give me your hand—I beg you with my tears!
Never, never again shall I return from Hades
once you have given me the soothing rites of fire.
Never again will you and I, alive and breathing,
huddle side-by-side, apart from loyal comrades,
making plans together—never . . . Grim death,
that death assigned from the day that I was born
has spread its hateful jaws to take me down.
And you too,
your fate awaits you too, godlike as you are, Achilles—
to die in battle beneath the proud rich Trojans' walls!
But one thing more. A last request—grant it, please.
Never bury my bones apart from yours, Achilles,
let them lie together . . .
just as we grew up together in your house,
after Menoetius brought me there from Opois,
and only a boy, but banished for bloody murder
the day I killed Amphidamas' son. I was a fool—
I never meant to kill him—quarreling over a dice game.
Then the famous horseman Peleus took me into his halls,
he reared me with kindness, appointed me your aide.
So now let a single urn, the gold two-handled urn
your noble mother gave you, hold our bones-together!"

 

  And the swift runner Achilles reassured him warmly:
"Why have you returned to me here, dear brother, friend?
Why tell me of all that I must do? I'll do it all.
I will obey you, your demands. Oh come closer!
Throw our arms around each other, just for a moment—
take some joy in the tears that numb the heart!"

 

  In the same, breath he stretched his loving arms
but could not seize him, no, the ghost slipped underground
like a wisp of smoke . . . with a high thin cry.
And Achilles sprang up with a start and staring wide,
drove his fists together and cried in desolation, "Ah god!
So even in Death's strong house there is something left,
a ghost, a phantom—true, but no real breath of life.
All night long the ghost of stricken Patroclus
hovered over me, grieving, sharing warm tears,
telling me, point by point, what I must do.
Marvelous—like the man to the life!"
So he cried
and his outcry stirred in them all a deep desire to grieve,
and Dawn with her rose-red fingers shone upon them weeping
round the wretched corpse. At daybreak King Agamemnon
ordered parties of men and mules to haul in timber,
pouring from the tents with a good man in charge,
the lordly Idomeneus' aide-in-arms Meriones.
The troops moved out with loggers' axes in hand
and sturdy cabled ropes as mules trudged on ahead.
Uphill, downhill, crisscross, zigzag on they tramped
and once they reached the slopes of Ida with all her springs,
quickly pitching themselves at towering, leaf-crowned oaks,
they put their backs into strokes of the whetted bronze axes
and huge trunks came crashing down. They split them apart,
lashed the logs to the mules and their hoofs tore up the earth,
dragging them down to level ground through dense brush.
And all the woodcutters hoisted logs themselves—
by command of Idomeneus' good aide Meriones—
and they heaved them down in rows along the beach
at the site Achilles chose to build an immense mound
for Patroclus and himself.
  With boundless timber piled
on all sides of the place, down they sat, waiting, massed.
And at once Achilles called his Myrmidons keen for battle:
"Belt yourselves in bronze! Each driver yoke his team!
Chariots harnessed!" 'Up they rose and strapped on armor
and swung aboard the war-cars, drivers, fighters beside them—
and the horse moved out in front, behind came clouds of infantry,
men by thousands, and in their midst his comrades bore Patroclus.
They covered his whole body deep with locks of hair they cut
and cast upon him, and just behind them brilliant Achilles
held the head, in tears—this was his steadfast friend
whom he escorted down to the House of Death.

 

  When they reached the site Achilles had pointed out
they laid Patroclus down and swiftly built his body
a fitting height of timber.
And now the great runner remembered one more duty.
Stepping back from the pyre he cut the red-gold lock
he'd let grow long as a gift to the river god Spercheus—
scanning the wine-dark sea he prayed in anguish, "Spercheus!
All in vain my father Peleus vowed to you that there,
once I had journeyed home to my own dear fatherland,
I'd cut this lock for you and offer splendid victims,
dedicate fifty young ungelded rams to your springs,
there at the spot where your grove and smoking altar standl
So the old king vowed—but you've destroyed his hopes.
Now, since I shall not return to my fatherland,
I'd give my friend this lock . . .
and let the hero Patroclus bear it on his way."
With that,
Achilles placed the lock in his dear comrade's hands
and stirred in the men again a deep desire to grieve.
And now the sunlight would have set upon their tears
if Achilles had not turned to Agamemnon quickly:
"Atrides—you are the first the armies will obey.
Even of sorrow men can have their fill. So now
dismiss them from the pyre, have them prepare
an evening meal. We are the closest to the dead,
we'll see to all things here.
But I'd like the leading captains to remain."

 

  Hearing his wish, the lord of men Agamemnon
dismissed the troops at once to the balanced ships.
But the chief mourners stayed in place, piled timber
and built a pyre a hundred feet in length and breadth
and aloft it laid the corpse with heavy, aching hearts.
And droves of fat sheep and shambling crook-horned cattle
they led before the pyre, skinned and dressed them well.
And the greathearted Achilles, flensing fat from all,
wrapped the corpse with folds of it, head to foot,
then heaped the flayed carcasses round Patroclus.
He set two-handled jars of honey and oil beside him,
leaned them against the bier—and then with wild zeal
slung the bodies of four massive stallions onto the pyre
and gave a wrenching groan. And the dead lord Patroclus
had fed nine dogs at table—he slit the throats of two,
threw them onto the pyre and then a dozen brave sons
of the proud Trojans he hacked to pieces with his bronze . . .
Achilles' mighty heart was erupting now with slaughter—
he loosed the iron rage of fire to consume them all
and cried out, calling his dear friend by name,
"Farewell, Patroclus, even there in the House of Death!
All that I promised once I have performed at last.
Here are twelve brave sons of the proud Trojans—
all, the fire that feeds on you devours them all
but not Hector the royal son of Priam, Hector
I will never give to the hungry flames—
wild dogs will bolt his flesh!"
  So he threatened
but the dogs were not about to feed on Hector.
Aphrodite daughter of Zeus beat off the packs,
day and night, anointing Hector's body with oil,
ambrosial oil of roses, so Achilles could not rip
the prince's skin as he dragged him back and forth.
And round him Phoebus Apollo brought a dark cloud down
from high sky to the plain to shroud the entire space
where Hector's body lay, before the sun's white fury
could sear away his flesh, his limbs and sinews.

 

  But the pyre of dead Patroclus was not burning-


and the swift runner Achilles thought of what to do.
Stepping back from the pyre he prayed to the two winds—
Zephyr and Boreas, West and North—promised splendid victims
and pouring generous, brimming cups from a golden goblet,
begged them to come, so the wood might burst in flame
and the dead bum down to ash with all good speed.
And Iris, hearing his prayers, rushed the message on
to the winds that gathered now in stormy Zephyr's halls
to share his brawling banquet. Iris swept to a stop
and once they saw her poised at the stone threshold
all sprang up, each urged her to sit beside him
but she refused, pressing on with her message:
"No time for sitting now. No, I must return
to the Ocean's running stream, the Aethiopians' land.
They are making a splendid sacrifice to the gods—
I must not miss my share of the sacred feast.
But I bring Achilles' prayers!
He begs you to come at once, Boreas, blustering Zephyr,
he promises splendid victims-come with a strong blast
and light the pyre where Patroclus lies in state
and all the Argive armies mourn around him!"

 

  Message delivered, off she sped as the winds rose
with a superhuman roar, stampeding clouds before them.
Suddenly reaching the open sea in gale force,
whipping whitecaps under a shrilling killer-squall
.they raised the good rich soil of Troy and struck the pyre
and a huge inhuman blaze went howling up the skies.
All night long they hurled the flames-massed on the pyre,
blast on screaming blast—and all night long the swift Achilles,
lifting a two-handled cup, dipped wine from a golden bowl
and poured it down on the ground and drenched the earth,
calling out to the ghost of stricken, gaunt Patroclus.
As a father weeps when he burns his son's bones,
dead on his wedding day,
and his death has plunged his parents in despair .. .
so Achilles wept as he burned his dear friend's bones,
dragging himself around the pyre, choked with sobs.

 

  At that hour the morning star comes rising up
to herald a new day on earth, and riding in its wake
the Dawn flings out her golden robe across the sea,
the funeral fires sank low, the flames died down.
And the winds swung round and headed home again,
over the Thracian Sea, and the heaving swells moaned.
And at last Achilles, turning away from the corpse-fire,
sank down, exhausted. Sweet sleep overwhelmed him.
But Agamemnon's followers grouped together now
and as they approached Achilles,
the din and trampling of their feet awoke him.
He sat up with a start and made his wishes known:
"Atrides—chiefs of Achaea's united forces—
first put out the fires with glistening wine,
wherever the flames still burn in all their fury.
Then let us collect the bones of Menoetius' son Patroclus,
pick them out with care-but they cannot be mistaken:
he lay amidst the pyre, apart from all the others
burned at the edge, the ruck of men and horses.
Then let us place his bones in a golden urn,
sealed tight and dry with a double fold of fat,
till I myself lie hid in the strong House, of Death.
For his barrow, build him nothing large, I ask you,
something right for the moment. And then, later,
Achaeans can work to make it broad and lofty,
all who survive me here,
alive in the benched ships when I am gone."

 

  And the men obeyed the swift runner's orders.
They first put out the fires with glistening wine,
far as the flames had spread and the ashes bedded deep.
In tears they gathered their gentle comrade's white bones,
all in a golden urn, sealed with a double fold of fat,
and stowed the urn in his shelter, covered well
with a light linen shroud, then laid his barrow out.
Around the pyre they planted a ring of stone revetments,
piled the loose earth high in a mound above the ring
and once they'd heaped the barrow turned to leave.
But Achilles held the armies on the spot.
He had them sit in a great and growing circle—
now for funeral games—and brought from his ships
the trophies for the contests: cauldrons and tripods,
stallions, mules and cattle with massive heads,
women sashed and lovely, and gleaming gray iron.
First,
for the fastest charioteers he set out glittering prizes:
a woman to lead away, flawless, skilled in crafts,
and a two-eared tripod, twenty-two measures deep—
all that for the first prize.
Then for the runner-up he brought forth a mare,
unbroken, six years old, with a mule foal in her womb.
For the third he produced a fine four-measure cauldron
never scorched by flames, its sheen as bright as new.
For the fourth he set out two gold bars, for the fifth,
untouched by fire as well, a good two-handled jar.
And he rose up tall and challenged all the Argives:
"Atrides—Achaeans-at-arms! Let the games beginl
The trophies lie afield-they await the charioteers.
If we held our games now in another hero's honor,
surely I'd walk off to my tent with first prize.
You know how my team outstrips all others' speed.
Immortal horses they are, Poseidon gave them himself
to my father Peleus, Peleus passed them on to me.
But I and our fast stallions will not race today,
so strong his fame, the charioteer they've lost,
so kind—always washing them down with fresh water,
sleeking their long manes with smooth olive oil.
No wonder they stand here, mourning . . .
look, trailing those very manes along the ground.
They both refuse to move, saddled down with grief.
But all the rest of you, come, all Achaeans in camp
who trust to your teams and bolted chariots—
take your places now!"
  Achilles' call rang out
and it brought the fastest drivers crowding forward.
The first by far, Eumelus lord of men sprang up,
Admetus' prized son who excelled in horsemanship
and following him Tydides, powerful Diomedes,
yoking the breed of Tros he'd wrested from Aeneas
just the other day when Apollo saved their master.
Then Atreus' son Menelaus, the red-haired captain
born of the gods, leading under the yoke his racers,
Blaze, Agamemnon's mare, and his own stallion Brightfoot.
Anchises' son Echepolus gave Agamemnon Blaze,
a gift that bought him off from the king's armies
bound for windy Troy: he'd stay right where he was,
a happy man, since Zeus had given him vast wealth
and he lived in style on Sicyon's broad dancing rings.
His was the mare Atrides harnessed, champing for the race.
And the fourth to yoke his full-maned team was Antilochus,
the splendid son of Nestor the old high-hearted king,
lord Neleus' offspring. A team of Pylian purebreds
drew his chariot. His father stood at his side,
lending sound advice to the boy's own good sense:
"Young as you are, Antilochus, how the gods have loved you!
Zeus and Poseidon taught you horsemanship, every sort,
so there's no great need for me to set you straight.
Well you know how to double round the post . . .
but you've got the slowest nags—a handicap, I'd say.
Yet even if other teams are faster, look at their drivers:
there's not a trick in their whips that you don't have at hand.
So plan your attack, my friend, muster all your skills
or watch the prize slip by!
It's skill, not brawn, that makes the finest woodsman.
By skill, too, the captain holds his ship on course,
scudding the wine-dark sea though rocked by gales.
By skill alone, charioteer outraces charioteer.
The average driver, leaving all to team and car,
recklessly makes his turn, veering left and right,
his pair swerving over the course-he can't control them.
But the cunning driver, even handling slower horses,
always watches the post, turns it close, never loses
the first chance to relax his reins and stretch his pair
but he holds them tight till then, eyes on the leader.
Now, the turn itself—it's clear, you cannot miss it.
There's a dead tree-stump standing six feet high,
it's oak or pine, not rotted through by the rains,
and it's propped by two white stones on either side.
That's your halfway mark where the homestretch starts
and there's plenty of good smooth racing-room around it—
it's either the grave-mound of a man dead long ago
or men who lived before us set it up as a goal.
Now, in any event, swift Achilles makes it
his turning-post. And you must hug it close
as you haul your team and chariot round but you
in your tight-strung car, you lean to the left yourself,
just a bit as you whip your right-hand horse, hard,
shout him on, slacken your grip and give him rein.
But make your left horse hug that post so close
the hub of your well-turned wheel will almost seem
to scrape the rock—just careful not to graze it!
You'll maim your team, you'll smash your car to pieces.
A joy to your rivals, rank disgrace to yourself .. .
So keep your head, my boy, be on the lookout.
Trail the field. out but pass them all at the post,
no one can catch you then or overtake you with a surge—
not if the man behind you were driving huge Arion,
Adrastus' lightning stallion sired by the gods,
or Laomedon's team, the .greatest bred in Troy."

 

  Nestor sat down again. He'd shown his son the ropes,
the last word in the master horseman's skills.

 

  Now after Meriones yoked his sleek horses fifth,
they boarded their cars and dropped lots in a helmet.
Achilles shook it hard—Antilochus' lot leapt out
so he drew the inside track.
Next in the draw came hardy lord Eumelus,
Atrides Menelaus the famous spearman next
and Meriones drew the fourth starting-lane
and Tydides Diomedes drew the fifth and last,
the best of them all by far at driving battle-teams.
All pulled up abreast as Achilles pointed out the post,
far off on the level plain, and stationed there beside it
an umpire, old lord Phoenix, his father's aide-in-arms,
to mark the field at the turn and make a true report.

 

  Ready—
whips raised high—
at the signal all together
lashed their horses' backs and shouted, urging them on—
they broke in, a burst of speed, in no time swept the plain,
leaving the ships behind and lifting under their chests
the dust clung to the teams like clouds or swirling gales
as their manes went streaming back in the gusty tearing wind.
The cars shot on, now jouncing along the earth that rears us all,
now bounding clear in the air but the drivers kept erect
in the lurching cars and the heart of each man raced,
straining for victory—each man yelled at his pair
as they flew across the plain in a whirl of dust.
But just out of the turn,
starting the homestretch back to sunlit sea
the horses lunged, each driver showed his form,
the whole field went racing full tilt and at once
the fast mares of Eumelus surged far out in front—
And after him came Diomedes' team, Tros's stallions
hardly a length behind now, closing at each stride
and at any moment it seemed they'd mount Eumelus' car,
their hot breath steaming his back and broad shoulders,
their heads hovering over him, breakneck on they flew—
and now he'd have passed him or forced a dead heat
if Apollo all of a sudden raging at Diomedes
had not knocked the shining whip from his fist.
Tears of rage came streaming down his cheeks
as he watched Eumelus' mares pulling farther ahead
and his team losing pace, no whip to lash them on . . .
But Athena, missing nothing of Phoebus' foul play
that robbed Diomedes, sped to the gallant captain,
handed him back his whip, primed his team with power
and flying after Admetus' son in full immortal fury
the goddess smashed his yoke. His mares bolted apart,
careening off the track and his pole plowed the ground
and Eumelus hurled from the chariot, tumbling over the wheel,
the skin was ripped from his elbows, mouth and nostrils,
his forehead battered in, scraped raw at the brows,
tears filling his eyes, his booming voice choked—
But veering round the wreck Diomedes steered his racers
shooting far ahead of the rest, leaving them in the dust
as Athena fired his team and gave the man his glory.
And after him came Atrides, red-haired Menelaus;
next Antilochus, urging his father's horses:
"Drive, the two of you—full stretch and fast!
I don't tell you to match the leader's speed,
skilled Diomedes' team—look, Athena herself
just fired their pace and gave their master glory.
But catch Menelaus' pair—fast—don't get left behind—
or Blaze will shower the two of you with disgrace—
Blaze is a mare! Why falling back, my brave ones?
I warn you both—so help me it's the truth—
no more grooming for you at Nestor's hands!
The old driver will slaughter you on the spot
with a sharp bronze blade if you slack off now
and we take a lesser prize. After them, faster—
full gallop—I'll find the way, I've got the skill
to slip past him there where the track narrows—
I'll never miss my chance!"
Whipped with fear
by their master's threats they put on a fresh burst
for a length or two but suddenly brave Antilochus
saw the narrow place where the road washed out—
a sharp dip in the land where massing winter rains
broke off the edge, making it all one sunken rut.
There Atrides was heading-no room for two abreast—
but Antilochus swerved to pass him, lashing his horses
off the track then swerving into him neck-and-neck
and Atrides, frightened, yelled out at the man,
"Antilochus—you drive like a maniac! Hold your horses!
The track's too narrow here—it widens soon for passing—
watch out—you'll crash your chariot, wreck us both!"

 

  So he cried but Antilochus drove on all the wilder,
cracking his lash for more speed like a man stone deaf.
As far as a full shoulder-throw of a whirling discus
hurled by a young contender testing out his strength,
so far they raced dead even. But then Menelaus' pair
dropped back as he yielded, cut the pace on purpose—
he feared the massive teams would collide on the track
and the tight-strung cars capsize, the men themselves
go sprawling into the dust, striving, wild for triumph.
As his rival passed the red-haired captain cursed him:
"Antilochus—no one alive more treacherous than you!
Away with you, madman—damn you!
How wrong we were when we said you had good sense.
You'll never take the prize unless you take the oath!"

 

  Turning back to his team, calling, shouting them on:
"Don't hold back, don't stop now-galled as you are—
that team in the lead will sag in the leg before you—
robbed of their prime, their racing days are done!"
And lashed with fear by their master's angry voice
they put on a surge, closing on them fast.
And all the while
the armies tense in a broad circle watched for horses
flying back on the plain in a rising whirl of dust.
The first to make them out was the Cretan captain.
Idomeneus sat perched on a rise outside the ring,
a commanding lookout point, and hearing a driver
shouting out in the distance, recognized the voice,
could see a stallion too—far in the lead, unmistakable—
a big chestnut beauty, all but the blaze he sported
stark white on his forehead, round as a full moon.
He sprang to his feet, calling down to cohorts,
"Friends—lords of the Argives, 0 my captains—
am I the only one who can spot that pair
or can you see them too?
Seems to me it's a new team out in front,
a new driver as well, just coming into sight.
The mares of Eumelus must have come to grief,
somewhere downfield-they led on the way out.
I saw them heading first for the turn, by god,
but I can't find them now—anywhere—hard as I look,
left and right, scanning the whole Trojan plain.
He lost his reins, he lost control of his horses
round the post and they failed to make the turn—
that's where he got thrown, I'd say, his chariot smashed
and his horses went berserk and bolted off.
Stand up,
look for yourselves! I can't make them out . . .
not for certain, no, but the leader seems to me
an Aetolian man by birth-he's king of the Argives,
horse-breaking Tydeus' son, rugged Diomedes!"

 

  But quick Little Ajax rounded on him roughly:
"Loose talk, Idomeneus—why are you always sounding off?
They still have a way to go out there, those racing teams.
You too, you're a far cry from the youngest Argive here,
nor are the eyes in your head our sharpest scouts
but you're always blustering, you, you foul-mouthed—
why must we have you blurting out this way
in the face of keener men?
Those mares in front are the same that led before—
they're Eumelus' mares, look, and there's Eumelus now,
astride his chariot, gripping the reins himself!"

 

  But the Cretan captain burst back in answer,
"Ajax, champion wrangler in all the ranks! Stupid too,
first and last the worst man in the Argive armies—
stubborn, bullnecked fool. Come now,
let's both put up a tripod or a cauldron,
wager which horses are really out in front
and we'll make Atrides Agamemnon our referee—
you'll learn, don't worry, once you pay the price!"

 

  Ajax rose in fury to trade him taunt for taunt,
and now the two of them might have come to blows
if Achilles himself had not stood up to calm them:
"Enough! No more trading your stinging insults now,
Ajax, Idomeneus! It's offensive—this is not the time.
You'd be the first to blame a man who railed this way.
Sit down in the ring, you two, and watch the horses—
they'll be home in a moment, racing hard to win.
Then each can see for himself who comes in second,
who takes off first prize."
In the same breath


Diomedes came on storming toward them-closer, look,
closing—lashing his team nonstop, full-shoulder strokes,
making them kick high as they hurtled toward the goal.
Constant sprays of dust kept pelting back on the driver,
the chariot sheathed in gold and tin careering on
in the plunging stallions' wake, its spinning rims
hardly leaving a rut behind in the thin dust
as the team thundered in—a whirlwind finish!
He reined them back in the ring with drenching sweat,
lather streaming down to the ground from necks and chests.
Their master leapt down from the bright. burnished car,
propped his whip on the yoke. His aide lost no time—
the hardy Sthenelus rushed to collect the prizes,
gave their proud troops the woman to lead away
and they carried off the handsome two-eared tripod
as he was loosing the horses from the harness . . .

 

  Antilochus next—the son of Nestor drove in second,
beating Atrides not by speed but cunning—
but still Menelaus kept his racers close behind.
Tight as the closing gap between the wheel and horse
when he hauls his master's car top speed across the flats,
the very tip of his tail brushing the running-rim
and the wheel spins closer, hardly a gap between
as he sweeps the open plain—that much, no more,


Menelaus trailed Antilochus, dauntless driver.
At first he'd trailed him a full discus-throw
but now he was closing, gaining on him fast—
yes, Blaze with all her fury and flowing mane,
Agamemnon's mare was coming on with a strong surge
and now if the two teams had a longer course to run
Menelaus would have passed him—no dead heat about it.
Then Idomeneus' good aide Meriones came in fourth,
trailing the famed Atrides by a spear-throw.
His team had sleek manes but the slowest pace afield
and the man himself was the poorest racing-driver.
But Admetus' son Eumelus came in last of all . . .
dragging his fine chariot, flogging his team before him.
Seeing him there the swift Achilles filled with pity,
rose in their midst and said these winging words:
"The best man drives his purebred team home last!
Come, let's give him a prize, it's only right
but second prize, of course—
Tydeus' son must carry off the first."
So he said
and the armies called assent to what he urged.
And now, spurred by his comrades' quick approval,
Achilles was just about to give the man the mare
when Antilochus, son of magnanimous old Nestor,
leapt to his feet and lodged a formal protest:
"Achilles—I'll be furious if you carry out that plan!
Do you really mean to strip me of my prize?—
so concerned that his team and car were wrecked,
and the fellow too, for all his racing skills.
Why, he should have prayed to the deathless gods!
Then he would never have finished last of all.
You pity the man? You're fond of him, are you?
You have hoards of gold in your tents, bronze, sheep,
serving-girls by the score and purebred racers too:
pick some bigger trophy out of the whole lot
and hand it on to the man, but do it later—
or now, at once, and win your troops' applause.
I won't give up the mare! The one who wants her—
step this way and try—
he'll have to fight me for her with his fists!"

 

  He flared up and the swift runner Achilles smiled,
delighting in Antilochus—he liked the man immensely.
He answered him warmly, winged words: "Antilochus,
you want me to fetch an extra gift from my tents,
a consolation prize for Eumelus? I'm glad to do it.
I'll give him the breastplate I took from Asteropaeus.
It's solid bronze with a glittering overlay of tin,
rings on rings. A gift he'll value highly."

 

  He asked Automedon, ready aide, to bring
the breastplate from his tents. He went and brought it,
handed it to Eumelus. The man received it gladly.

 

  But now Menelaus rose, his heart smoldering,
still holding a stubborn grudge against Antilochus.
A crier put a staff in his hands and called for silence.
And with all his royal weight Atrides thundered, "Antilochus—
you used to have good sense! Now see what you've done!
Disgraced my horsemanship—you've fouled my horses,
cutting before me, you with your far slower team.
Quickly, lords of the Argives, all my captains,
judge between us—impartially, no favoritism—
so none of our bronze-armed men can ever say,
'Only with lies did Atrides beat Antilochus out
and walk off with the mare—his team was far slower
but the king's own rank and power took the prize!'
Wait, I'll settle things myself. I have no fear
that any Achaean will accuse me: I'll be fair.
Come over here, Antilochus, royal prince—
this is the old custom. Come, stand in front
of your team and chariot, grasp the coiling whip
that lashed them home, lay your hand on their manes
and swear by the mighty god who grips and shakes the earth
you never blocked my chariot—not by deliberate foul."

 

  Antilochus came to his senses, backed off quickly:
"No more, please. I am much younger than you are,
lord Menelaus—you're my senior, you the greater man.
Well you know how the whims of youth break all the rules.
Our wits quicker than wind, our judgment just as flighty.
Bear with me now. I'll give you this mare I won—
of my own accord. And any finer trophy you'd ask
from my own stores, I'd volunteer at once,
gladly, Atrides, my royal king—anything
but fall from your favor all my days to come
and swear a false oath in the eyes of every god."

 

  With that the son of magnanimous old Nestor
led the mare and turned her over to Menelaus' hands.
And his heart melted now like the dew that wets the corn
when the fresh stalks rise up and the ripe fields ripple—
so the heart in your chest was melted now, Menelaus,
and you gave your friend an answer, winged words:
"Antilochus, now it is my turn to yield to you,
for all my mounting anger . . .
you who were never wild or reckless in the past.
It's only youth that got the better of your discretion,
just this once—but the next time be more careful.
Try to refrain from cheating your superiors.
No other Achaean could have brought me round so soon,
but seeing that you have suffered much and labored long,
your noble father, your brother too-all for my sake—
I'll yield to your appeal, I'll even give you the mare,
though she is mine, so our people here will know
the heart inside me is never rigid, unrelenting."

 

  He handed back the mare to Antilochus' man.
Noemon led her off while Atrides took instead
the polished cauldron bright in all its sheen.
Meriones, who had come in fourth took fourth prize,
the two bars of gold. That left the fifth unclaimed,
the jar with double handles. Bearing it through the crowd
Achilles gave it to Nestor, standing close beside him,
urging, "Here, old friend-a trophy for you too!
Lay it away as a treasure . . .
let it remind you of the burial of Patroclus.
Never again will you see him among the Argives.
I give you this prize, a gift for giving's sake,
for now you will never fight with fists or wrestle,
or enter the spear-throw, or race on sprinting feet.
The burdens of old age already weigh you down."

 

  And Achilles placed the trophy in Nestor's hands.
He thrilled to have it and spoke out winging words:
"True, true, my son, all of it, right on the mark.
My legs no longer firm, my friend, dead on my feet,
nor do my arms go shooting from my shoulders—
the stunning punch, the left and right are gone.,
Oh make me young again, and the strength inside me
steady as a rock! As fresh as I was that day
the Epeans buried lord Amarynceus in Buprasion
and his sons held games to celebrate the king .. .
No one could match me there, none among the Epeans,
not even our own Pylians, or Aetolia's hardy men.
At boxing I destroyed Clytomedes, Enops' boy.
Ancaeus of Pleuron wrestled against me—down he went.
Fast as Iphiclus was, I raced him to his knees,
with a spear I outhurled Phyleus, Polydorus too.
Only at chariot-racing the sons of Actor beat me—
two against one, cutting before me, hellbent to win,
for the biggest prize was left for the last event.
But it took twins—one with the reins rock-steady,
holding them rock-steady, the other lashed the team.
So that's the man I was . . . but now's the time
for the younger men to lock in rough encounters,
time for me to yield to the pains of old age.
But there was a day I shone among the champions.
Well,
you must get on with your friend's burial now—
the games must go on—
but I accept this gladly, my old heart rejoices.
You never forget my friendship, never miss a chance
to pay me the honor I deserve among our comrades.
For all that you have done for me, Achilles,
may the immortals fill your cup with joy!"

 

  He savored every word of Nestor's story.
Then Achilles made his way through crowds of troops
and set out prizes next for the bruising boxing-match.
He fetched and tethered a heavy-duty mule in the ring,
six years old, unbroken—the hardest kind to break—
and offered the loser a cup with double handles.
He rose up tall and challenged all the Argives:
"Son of Atreus—all you Achaean men-at-arms!
We invite two men—our best—to compete for these.
Put up your fists, fight for what you're worth.
The man that Apollo helps outlast the other—
clearly witnessed here by Achaea's armies—
he takes this beast of burden back to his tents
but the one he beats can have the two-eared cup."

 

  And a powerful, huge man loomed up at once,
Panopeus' son Epeus, the famous boxing champion.
He clamped a hand on the draft mule and shouted,
"Step right up and get it—whoever wants that cup!,
This mule is mine, I tell you. No Achaean in sight
will knock me out and take her—I am the greatest!
So what if I'm not a world-class man of war?
How can a man be first in all events?
I warn you, soldiers—so help me it's the truth—
I'll crush you with body-blows, I'll crack your ribs to splinters!
You keep your family mourners near to cart you off—
once my fists have worked you down to pulp!"

 

  Dead silence. So the armies met his challenge.
Only Euryalus rose to take him on, heroic volunteer,
bred of Talaus' blood and a son of King Mecisteus
who went to Thebes in the old days, when Oedipus fell,
and there at his funeral games defeated all the Thebans.
The spearman Diomedes served as the man's second,
goading him oft, intent to see him win.
First he cinched him round with the boxer's belt
then taking rawhide thongs, cut from a field-ox,
wrapped his knuckles well.
  Both champions, belted tight,
stepped into the ring. squared off at each other and let loose,
trading jabs with their clenched fists then slugged it out—
flurries of jolting punches, terrific grinding of jaws,
sweat rivering, bodies glistening—suddenly Euryalus
glanced for an opening, dropped his guard and Epeus hurled
his smashing roundhouse hook to the head—a knockout blow!
He could keep his feet no longer, knees caved in on the spot—
as under the ruffling North Wind a fish goes arching up
and flops back down on a beach-break strewn with seaweed
and a dark wave blacks him out. So he left his feet
and down he went—out cold—but big-hearted Epeus
hoisted him in his arms and stood him upright.
A band of loyal followers rushed to help him,
led him out of the ring, his feet dragging,
head lolling to one side, spitting clots of blood . . .
still senseless after they propped him in their comer,
and they had to fetch the two-eared cup themselves.
Quickly
Achilles displayed before the troops the prizes set
for the third event, the grueling wrestling-match.
For the winner a large tripod made to stride a fire
and worth a dozen oxen, so the soldiers reckoned.
For the loser he led a woman through their midst,
worth four, they thought, and skilled in many crafts.
And he rose up tall and challenged all the Achaeans:
"Now two come forward—fight to win this prize!"
And the giant Ajax got to his feet at once,
Odysseus stood up too,
an expert at every subtle, cunning hold.
Both champions, belted tight, stepped into the ring
and grappling each other hard with big burly arms,
locked like rafters a master builder bolts together,
slanting into a pitched roof to fight the ripping winds.
And their backbones creaked as scuffling hands tugged
for submission-holds and sweat streamed down their spines
and clusters of raw welts broke out on ribs and shoulders
slippery, red with blood, and still they grappled, harder,
locking for victory, locked for that burnished tripod:
Odysseus no more able to trip and bring to ground
his man than Ajax could—Odysseus' brawn held out.
A stalemate. And the troops were growing bored,
so at last the giant Ajax spurred his rival,
grunting, "Son of Laertes—resourceful one, enough—
you hoist me or I hoist you-and leave the rest to Zeus."

 


  As Ajax heaved him up Odysseus never missed a trick—
he kicked him behind the knee, clipping the hollow,
cut his legs from under him, knocked him backward—
pinned as Odysseus flung himself across his chest!
That roused the crowd, they leaned to look and marveled.
The next throw now—long-enduring Odysseus' turn . . .
he tried to hoist Great Ajax, budged him a little
off the ground, true, but he could not heave him clear,
then hooked him round a knee and down they sprawled together,
both men clenched in a death-lock, tussling round in dust.
And now they'd have jumped up, gone for the third fall
if Achilles himself had not stepped in and stopped them:
"No more struggling-don't kill yourselves in sport!
Victory goes to both. Share the prizes. Off you go,
so the rest of the men can have a crack at contests."

 

  And they listened gladly, nodding at his decision,
wiped the dust from their backs and pulled their shirts on.

 

  Achilles quickly set out prizes for the footrace.
A silver bowl, gorgeous, just six measures deep
but the finest mixing bowl in all the world.
Nothing could match its beauty—a masterpiece
that skilled Sidonian craftsmen wrought to perfection,
Phoenician traders shipped across the misty seas
and mooring in Thoas' roads, presented to the king.
Euneus son of Jason gave it to Prince Patroclus,
the ransom paid to release Lycaon, Priam's son.
This was the bowl Achilles offered up at games
to commemorate his great friend—for the one racer
who proved the fastest on his feet. For the runner-up
he produced a massive ox with rippling folds of fat
and half a bar of gold for him who came in last.
He rose up tall and challenged all the Achaeans:
"Now men come forward, fight to win this prize!"
And the racing Oilean Ajax sprang up at once,
Odysseus quick at tactics too, then Nestor's son,
Antilochus, fastest of all the young men in the ranks.
Achilles pointed out the post . . .
  They toed the line—
and broke flat out from the start and Ajax shot ahead
with quick Odysseus coming right behind him, close
as the weaver's rod to a well-sashed woman's breast
when she deftly pulls it toward her, shooting the spool
across the warp, still closer, pressing her breast—
so close Odysseus sprinted, hot on Ajax' heels,
feet hitting his tracks before the dust could settle
and quick Odysseus panting, breathing down his neck,
always forcing the pace and all the Argives shouting,
cheering him on as he strained for triumph, sprinting on
and fast in the homestretch, spurting toward the goal
Odysseus prayed in his heart to blazing-eyed Athena,
"Hear me, Goddess, help me-hurry, urge me on!"
So Odysseus prayed and Athena heard his prayer,
put spring in his limbs, his feet, his fighting hands
and just as the whole field came lunging in for the trophy
Ajax slipped at a dead run—Athena tripped him up—
right where the dung lay slick from bellowing cattle
the swift runner Achilles slew in Patroclus' honor.
Dung stuffed his mouth, his nostrils dripped muck
as shining long-enduring Odysseus flashed past him
to come in first by far and carry off the cup
while Ajax took the ox. The racer in all his glory
just stood there, clutching one of the beast's horns,
spitting out the dung and sputtering to his comrades,
"Foul, by heaven! The goddess fouled my finish!
Always beside Odysseus—just like the man's mother,
rushing to put his rivals in the dust."

 

  They all roared with laughter at his expense.
Antilochus came in last and carried off his prize
with a broad smile and a joke to warm his comrades:
"I'll tell you something you've always known, my friends—
down to this very day the gods prefer-old-timers.
Look at Ajax now, with only a few years on me.
But Odysseus—why, he's out of the dark ages,
one of the old relics—
but in green old age, they say. No mean feat
to beat him out in a race, for all but our Achilles."

 

  Bantering so, but he flattered swift Achilles
and the matchless runner paid him back in kind:
"Antilochus, how can I let your praise go unrewarded?
Here's more gold—a half-bar more in the bargain."

 

  He placed it in his hands, and he was glad to have it.
Then Achilles carried into the armies' broad ring
a spear trailing its long shadow, laid it down
and beside it placed a battle-shield and helmet,
the arms Patroclus stripped from lord Sarpedon.
And Achilles rose and challenged all the Argives:
"We invite two men—our best—to compete for these.
Full battle-gear, take up your slashing bronze lances.
Fight it out with each other, duel before the troops!
The soldier who gets in first and cuts a rival's flesh,
who pierces armor to draw blood and reach his entrails—
I'll give that man this broadsword, silver-studded,
handsome Thracian work I stripped from Asteropaeus.
But both fighters will share this armor, bear it off,
and we'll give them a victor's banquet in our tents."

 

  Huge Telamonian Ajax rose to meet the challenge,
Tydeus' son rose too, the powerful Diomedes.
Both men armed at opposite sides of the forces,
into the ring they strode and met, burning for battle,
glances menacing, wild excitement seizing all their comrades.
And just coming in range, just closing on each other . . .
they made three rapid charges, three lunges and then—
Ajax stabbed through Tydides' round balanced shield
but failed to reach his flesh-saved by the breastplate
just behind the buckler! But now Diomedes thrusting
over the giant's massive shield, again and again,
threatened to graze his throat—the spearpoint glinting sharp—
and such terror for Ajax struck his Argive friends
they cried for them to stop, to divide the prizes,
"Share and share alike!" But the hero Achilles
took the great long sword and gave it to Diomedes,
slung in its sheath on a supple, well-cut sword-strap.

 

  And now Achilles set out a lump of pig iron,
the shot Eetion used to put with all his power
before the swift runner Pelides brought him down
and hauled it off in the ships with all his other wealth.
Achilles rose up tall and challenged every Achaean:
"Now men come forward—compete to win this prize!
An ingot big enough to keep the winner in iron
for five wheeling years. Though his rich estates
lie far away in the country, it won't be want of iron
that brings his shepherd or plowman into town—
he'll be well-stocked at home."
  That was his offer.
Up stood Polypoetes, always braced for battle,
Leonteus flanked him, strong, intense as a god,
then Telamon's son Great Ajax, lord Epeus too.
They stood in a row. Big Epeus hefted the iron,
swung and heaved it—and comrades burst out laughing.
Next the veteran; Leonteus gave the weight a hurl,
then Ajax came up third and the giant flung it hard
with his rippling brawny arm to pass all other marks.
But then Polypoetes braced for battle took the weight
and far as a seasoned herdsman flings his throwing staff,
whirling in flight across his cows to keep them all in line—
so far he outhurled the whole field. The armies roared.
And the powerful Polypoetes' men sprang up to bear
the king's trophy back to their hollow ships.
Archery next—
and again Achilles set out iron, dark gray trophies,
ten double-headed axes, ten with single heads.
He stepped the mast of a dark-prowed man-of-war
far down the beach and tethered a fluttering dove
atop the pole, its foot looped with a light cord,
then challenged men to shoot and hit that mark:
"The man who hits the fluttering dove up there
can carry the whole array of double-axes home!
Whoever misses the bird but still hits the cord—
he's the loser, true, but he takes the single heads."

 

  Teucer the master archer rose to meet the challenge,
Meriones joined him, Idomeneus' rough-and-ready aide.
They dropped lots in a bronze helmet, shook it hard
and the lot fell to Teucer to shoot first . . .
He quickly loosed an arrow, full-draw force
but never swore to the Archer
he'd slaughter splendid victims, newborn lambs,
so he missed the dove—Apollo grudged him that—
but he hit the cord that tethered the bird's foot,
the tearing arrow split the cord straight through
and the bird shot into the sky and left the tether
dangling down to ground. The armies roared applause.
But already clutching a shaft while Teucer aimed
Meriones leapt to snatch the bow from his hand
and quickly swore to the distant deadly Archer
he'd slaughter splendid victims, newborn lambs—
Up under the clouds he glimpsed the fluttering dove
and there as she wheeled he hit her right beneath the wing
and straight through the heart and out the arrow passed,
plunged at Meriones' foot and stabbed the earth hard.
The dove settled onto the mast of the dark-prowed ship,
her neck wrenched awry, her beating wings went slack
and life breath flew from her limbs that instant
down she dropped, a long drop down to the ground.
The armies looked on wonder-struck and marveled.
Meriones carried off the double-axes, all ten,
Teucer took the singles back to his hollow ships.
Finally
Achilles produced a spear that trailed its long shadow,
a cauldron too, untouched by fire, chased with flowers
and worth an ox, and set them down in the ring.
And now the spear-throwers rose up to compete,
Atrides Agamemnon, lord of the far-flung kingdoms,
flanked by Idomeneus' rough-and-ready aide Meriones
but the swift runner Achilles interceded at once:
"Atrides—well we know how far you excel us all:
no one can match your strength at throwing spears,
you are the best by far!
Take first prize and return to your hollow ships
while we award this spear to the fighter Meriones,
if that would please your heart. That's what I propose."

 

  And Agamemnon the lord of men could not resist.
Achilles gave the bronze-shod spear to Meriones.
And the winning hero Atrides gave his own prize
to his herald Talthybius—the king's burnished trophy.

The games were over now. The gathered armies scattered,
each man to his fast ship, and fighters turned their minds
to thoughts of food and the sweet warm grip of sleep.
But Achilles kept on grieving for his friend,
the memory burning on . . .
and all-subduing sleep could not take him,
not now, he turned and twisted, side to side,
he longed for Patroclus' manhood, his gallant heart—
What rough campaigns they'd fought to an end together,
what hardships they had suffered, cleaving their way
through wars of men and pounding waves at sea.
The memories flooded over him, live tears flowing,
and now he'd lie on his side, now flat on his back,
now facedown again. At last he'd leap to his feet,
wander in anguish, aimless along the surf, and dawn on dawn
flaming over the sea and shore would find him pacing.
Then he'd yoke his racing team, to the chariot-harness,
lash the corpse of Hector behind the car for dragging
and haul him three times round the dead Patroclus' tomb,
and then he'd rest again in his tents and leave the body
sprawled facedown in the dust. But Apollo pitied Hector—
dead man though he was—and warded all corruption off
from Hector's corpse and round him, head to foot,
the great god wrapped the golden shield of storm
so his skin would never rip as Achilles dragged him on.

 

  And so he kept on raging, shaming noble Hector,
but the gods in bliss looked down and pitied Priam's son.
They kept on urging the sharp-eyed giant-killer Hermes
to go and steal the body, a plan that pleased them all,
but not Hera, Poseidon or the girl with blazing eyes.
They clung to their deathless hate of sacred Troy,
Priam and Priam's people, just as they had at first
when Paris in all his madness launched the war.
He offended Athena and Hera—both goddesses.
When they came to his shepherd's fold he favored Love
who dangled before his eyes the lust that loosed disaster.
But now, at the twelfth dawn since Hector's death,
lord Apollo rose and addressed the immortal powers:
"Hard-hearted you are, you gods, you live for cruelty!
Did Hector never bum in your honor thighs of oxen
and flawless, full-grown goats? Now you cannot
bring yourselves to save him—even his corpse—
so his wife can see him, his mother and his child,
his father Priam and Priam's people: how they'd rush
to burn his body on the pyre and give him royal rites!
But murderous Achilles—you gods, you choose to help Achilles.
That man without a shred of decency in his heart . . .
his temper can never bend and change—like some lion
going his own barbaric way, giving in to his power,
his brute force and wild pride, as down he swoops
on the flocks of men to seize his savage feast.
Achilles has lost all pity! No shame in the man,
shame that does great harm or drives men on to good.
No doubt some mortal has suffered a dearer loss than this,
a brother born in the same womb, or even a son . . .
he grieves, he weeps, but then his tears are through.
The Fates have given mortals hearts that can endure.
But this Achilles—first he slaughters Hector,
he rips away the noble prince's life
then lashes him to his chariot, drags him round
his beloved comrade's tomb. But why, I ask you?
What good will it do him? What honor will he gain?
Let that man beware, or great and glorious as he is,
we mighty gods will wheel on him in anger-look,
he outrages the senseless clay in all his fury!"

 

  But white-armed Hera flared at him in anger:
"Yes, there'd be some merit even in what you say,
lord of the silver bow—if all you gods, in fact,
would set Achilles and Hector high in equal honor.
But Hector is mortal. He sucked a woman's breast.
Achilles sprang from a goddess-one I reared myself—
I brought her up and gave her in marriage to a man,
to Peleus, dearest to all your hearts, you gods.
All you gods, you shared in the wedding rites,
and so did you, Apollo—there you sat at the feast
and struck your lyre. What company you keep now,
these wretched Trojans. You-forever faithless!"

 

  But Zeus who marshals the storm clouds warned his queen,
"Now, Hera, don't fly into such a rage at fellow gods.
These two can never attain the same degree of honor.
Still, the immortals loved Prince Hector dearly,
best of all the mortals born in Troy . . .
so I loved him, at least:
he never stinted with gifts to please my heart.
Never once did my altar lack its share of victims,
winecups tipped and the deep smoky savor. These,
these are the gifts we claim-they are our rights.
But as for stealing courageous Hector's body,
we must abandon the idea-not a chance in the world
behind Achilles' back. For Thetis is always there,
his mother always hovering near him night and day.
Now, would one of you gods call Thetis to my presence?—
so I can declare to her my solemn, sound decree:
Achilles must receive a ransom from King Priam,
Achilles must give Hector's body back."
So he decreed
and iris, racing a gale-wind down with Zeus's message,
mid-sea between Samos and Imbros' rugged cliffs
dove in a black swell as groaning breakers roared.
Down she plunged to the bottom fast as a lead weight
sheathed in a glinting lure of wild bull's horn,
bearing hooked death to the ravenous fish.
And deep in a hollow cave she came on Thetis.
Gathered round her sat the other immortal sea-nymphs
while Thetis amidst them mourned her brave son's fate,
doomed to die, she knew, on the fertile soil of Troy,
far from his native land. Quick as the wind now
Iris rushed to the goddess, urging, "Rise, Thetis—
Zeus with his everlasting counsels calls you now!"
Shifting on her glistening feet, the goddess answered,
"Why . . . what does the great god want with me?
I cringe from mingling with the immortals now—
Oh the torment—never-ending heartbreak!
But go I shall. A high decree of the Father
must not come to nothing—whatever he commands."

 

  The radiant queen of sea-nymphs seized a veil,
blue-black, no robe darker in all the Ocean's depths,
and launched up and away with wind-swift Iris leading—
the ground swell round them cleaved and opened wide.
And striding out on shore they soared to the high sky
and found farseeing Zeus, and around him all the gods
who live in bliss forever sat in a grand assembly.
And Thetis took a seat beside the Father,
a throne Athena yielded. Hera placed in her hand
a burnished golden cup and said some words of comfort,
and taking a few quick sips, Thetis gave it back . . .
The father of men and gods began to address them:
"You have come to Olympus now, immortal Thetis,
for all your grief—what unforgettable sorrow
seizes on your heart. I know it well myself.
Even so, I must tell you why I called you here.
For nine whole days the immortals have been feuding
over Hector's corpse and Achilles scourge of cities.
They keep urging the sharp-eyed giant-killer Hermes
to go and steal the body. But that is not my way.
I will grant Achilles glory and so safeguard
your awe and love of me for all the years to come.
Go at once to the camp, give your son this order:
tell him the gods are angry with him now
and I am rising over them all in deathless wrath
that he in heartsick fury still holds Hector's body,
there by his beaked ships, and will not give him back—
perhaps in fear of me he'll give him back at once.
Then, at the same time, I am winging Iris down
to greathearted Priam, commanding the king
to ransom his dear son, to go to Achaea's ships,
bearing gifts to Achilles, gifts to melt his rage."
So he decreed
and Thetis with her glistening feet did not resist a moment.
Down the goddess flashed from the peaks of Mount Olympus,
made her way to her son's camp, and there he was,
she found him groaning hard, choked with sobs.
Around him trusted comrades swung to the work,
preparing breakfast, steadying in their midst
a large fleecy sheep just slaughtered in the shelter.
But his noble mother, settling down at his side,
stroked Achilles gently, whispering his name: "My child—
how long will you eat your heart out here in tears and torment?
All wiped from your mind, all thought of food and bed?
It's a welcome thing to make love with a woman . . .
You don't have long to live now, well I know:
already I see them looming up beside you—death
and the strong force of fate. Listen to me,
quickly! I bring you a ,message sent by Zeus:
he says the gods are angry with you now
and he is rising over them all in deathless wrath
that you in heartsick fury still.hold Hector's body,
here by your beaked ships, and will not give him back.
O give him back at once—take ransom for the dead!"

 

  The swift runner replied in haste, "So be it.
The man who brings the ransom can take away the body,
if Olympian Zeus himself insists in all earnest."

 

  While mother and son agreed among the clustered ships,
trading between each other many winged words,
Father Zeus sped Iris down to sacred Troy:
"Quick on your way now, Iris, shear the wind!
Leave our Olympian stronghold—
take a message to greathearted Priam down in Troy:
he must go to Achaea's ships and ransom his dear son,
bearing gifts to Achilles, gifts to melt his rage.
But let him go alone, no other Trojan attend him,
only a herald with him, a seasoned, older one
who can drive the mules and smooth-running wagon
and bring the hero's body back to sacred Troy,
the man that brilliant Achilles killed in battle.
Let him have no fear of death, no dread in his heart,
such a powerful escort we will send him-the giant-killer
Hermes will guide him all the way to Achilles' presence.
And once the god has led him within the fighter's shelter,
Achilles will not kill him—he'll hold back all the rest:
Achilles is no madman, no reckless fool, not the one
to defy the gods' commands. Whoever begs his mercy
he will spare with all the kindness in his heart."
So he decreed
and Iris ran his message, racing with gale force
to Priam's halls where cries and mourning met her.
Sons huddled round their father deep in the courtyard,
robes drenched with tears, and the old man amidst them,
buried, beaten down in the cloak that wrapped his body . . .
Smeared on the old man's head and neck the dung lay thick
that he scraped up in his own hands, groveling in the filth.
Throughout the house his daughters and sons' wives wailed,
remembering all the fine brave men who lay dead now,
their lives destroyed at the fighting Argives' hands.
And Iris, Zeus's crier, standing alongside Priam,
spoke in a soft voice, but his limbs shook at once—
"Courage, Dardan Priam, take heart! Nothing to fear.
No herald of doom, I come on a friendly mission—
I come with all good will.
I bring you a message sent by Zeus, a world away
but he has you in his heart, he pities you now . . .
Olympian Zeus commands you to ransom royal Hector,
to bear gifts to Achilles, gifts to melt his rage.
But you must go alone, no other Trojan attend you,
only a herald with you, a seasoned, older one
who can drive the mules and smooth-running wagon
and bring the hero's body back to sacred Troy,
the man that brilliant Achilles killed in battle.
But have no fear of death, no dread in your heart,
such a powerful escort will conduct you-the giant-killer
Hermes will guide you all the way to Achilles' presence.
And once the god has led you within the fighter's shelter,
Achilles will not kill you—he'll hold back all the rest:
Achilles is no madman, no reckless fool, not the one
to defy the gods' commands. Whoever begs his mercy
he will spare with all the kindness in his heart!"

 

  And Iris racing the wind went veering off
and Priam ordered his sons to get a wagon ready,
a good smooth-running one, to hitch the mules
and strap a big wicker cradle across its frame.
Then down he went himself to his treasure-chamber,
high-ceilinged, paneled, fragrant with cedarwood
and a wealth of precious objects filled its chests.
He called out to his wife, Hecuba, "Dear womanl
An Olympian messenger came to me from Zeus—
I must go to Achaea's ships and ransom our dear son,
bearing gifts to Achilles, gifts to melt his rage.
Tell me, what should I do? What do you think?
Myself—a terrible longing drives me, heart and soul,
down to the ships, into the vast Achaean camp."

 

  But his wife cried out in answer, "No, no—
where have your senses gone?—that made you famous once,
both among outland men and those you rule in Troy!
How can you think of going down to the ships, alone,
and face the glance of the man who killed your sons,
so many fine brave boys? You have a heart of iron!
If he gets you in his clutches, sets his eyes on you—
that savage, treacherous man-he'll show no mercy,
no respect for your rights!
  Come, all we can do now
is sit in the halls, far from our son, and wail for Hector . . .
So this, this is the doom that strong Fate spun out,
our son's life line drawn with his first breath—
the moment I gave him birth—
to glut the wild dogs, cut off from his parents,
crushed by the stronger man. Oh would to god
that I could sink my teeth in his liver, eat him raw!
That would avenge what he has done to Hector—
no coward the man Achilles killed—my son stood
and fought for the men of Troy and their deep-breasted wives
with never a thought of flight or run for cover!"

 

  But the old and noble Priam answered firmly,
"I will go. My mind's made up. Don't hold me back.
And don't go flying off on your own across the halls,
a bird of evil omen—you can't dissuade me now.
If someone else had commanded me, some mortal man,
some prophet staring into the smoke, some priest,
I'd call it a lie and turn my back upon it.
Not now. I heard her voice with my own ears,
I looked straight at the goddess, face-to-face.
So I am going—her message must not come to nothing.
And if it is my fate to die by the beaked ships
of Achaeans armed in bronze, then die I shall.
Let Achilles cut me down straightway—
once I've caught my son in my arms and wept my fill!"

 

  He raised back the carved lids of the chests
and lifted out twelve robes, handsome, rich brocades,
twelve cloaks, unlined and light, as many blankets,
as many big white capes and shirts to go with them.
He weighed and carried out ten full bars of gold
and took two burnished tripods, four fine cauldrons
and last a magnificent cup the Thracians gave him once—
he'd gone on an embassy and won that priceless treasure—
but not even that did the old man spare in his halls,
not now, consumed with desire to ransom back his son.
Crowds of Trojans were mobbing his colonnades—
he gave them a tongue-lashing, sent them packing:
"Get out—you good-for-nothings, public disgraces!
Haven't you got enough to wail about at home
without coming here to add to all my griefs?
You think it nothing, the pain that Zeus has sent me?—
he's destroyed my best son! You'll learn too, in tears—
easier game you'll be for Argive troops to slaughter,
now my Hector's dead. But before I have to see
my city annihilated, laid waste before my eyes—
oh let me go down to the House of Death!"

 

  He herded them off with his staff—they fled outside
before the old man's fury. So he lashed out at his sons,
cursing the sight of Helenus, Paris, noble Agathon,
Pammon, Antiphonus, Polites loud with the war cry,
Deiphobus and Hippothous, even lordly Dius—
the old man shouted at all nine, rough commands:
"Get to your work! My vicious sons—my humiliations!
If only you'd all been killed at the fast ships
instead of my dear Hector . . .
But I—dear god, my life so cursed by fate!—
I fathered hero sons in the wide realm of Troy
and. now, now not a single one is left, I, tell you.
Mestor the indestructible, Troilus, passionate horseman
and Hector, a god among men—no son of a mortal man,
he seemed a deathless god's. But Ares killed them all
and all he left me are these, these disgraces—liars,
dancers, heroes only at beating the dancing-rings,
you plunder your own people for lambs and kids!
Why don't you get my wagon ready—now, at once?
Pack all these things aboard! We must be on our way!"

 

Terrified by their father's rough commands
the sons trundled a mule-wagon out at once,
a good smooth-running one,
newly finished, balanced and bolted tight,
and strapped a big wicker cradle across its frame.
They lifted. off its hook a boxwood yoke for the mules,
its bulging pommel fitted with rings for guide-reins,
brought out with the yoke its yoke-strap nine arms long
and wedged the yoke down firm on the sanded, tapered pole,
on the front peg, and slipped the yoke-ring onto its pin,
strapped the pommel with three good twists, both sides,
then lashed the assembly round and down the shaft
and under the clamp they made the lashing fast.
Then the priceless ransom for Hector's body:
hauling it up from the vaults they piled it high
on the wagon's well-made cradle, then they yoked the mules—
stamping their sharp hoofs, trained for heavy loads—
that the Mysians once gave Priam, princely gifts.
And last they yoked his team to the king's chariot,
stallions he bred himself in his own polished stalls.

 

  No sooner were both men harnessed up beneath the roofs,
Priam and herald, minds set on the coming journey,
than Hecuba rushed up to them, gaunt with grief,
her right hand holding a golden cup of honeyed wine
so the men might pour libations forth at parting.
She stood in front of the horses, crying up at Priam,
"Here, quickly—pour a libation out to Father Zeus!
Pray for a safe return from all our mortal enemies,
seeing you're dead set on going down to the ships—
though you go against my will. But if go you must,
pray, at least, to the great god of the dark storm cloud,
up there on Ida, gazing down on the whole expanse of Troy!
Pray for a bird of omen, Zeus's wind-swift messenger,
the dearest bird in the world to his prophetic heart,
the strongest thing on wings-clear on the right
so you can see that sign with your own eyes
and trust your life to it as you venture down
to Achaea's ships and the fast chariot-teams.
But if farseeing Zeus does not send you that sign—
his own messenger—then I urge you, beg you,
don't go down to the ships—
not for all the passion in your heart!"

 

  The old majestic Priam gave his answer:
"Dear woman, surely I won't resist your urging now.
It's well to lift our hands and ask great Zeus for mercy."

 

  And the old king motioned a steward standing by
to pour some clear pure water over his hands,
and she came forward, bearing a jug and basin.
He rinsed his hands, took the cup from his wife
and taking a stand amidst the forecourt, prayed,
pouring the wine to earth and scanning the high skies,
Priam prayed in his rich resounding voice: "Father Zeus!
Ruling over us all from Ida, god of greatness, god of glory! -
Grant that Achilles will receive me with kindness, mercy.
Send me a bird of omen, your own wind-swift messenger,
the dearest bird in the world to your prophetic heart,
the strongest thing on wings—clear on the right
so I can see that sign with my own eyes
and trust my life to it as I venture down
to Achaea's ships and the fast chariot-teams!"

 

  And Zeus in all his wisdom heard that prayer
and straightaway the Father launched an eagle—
truest of Zeus's signs that fly the skies—
the dark marauder that mankind calls the Black-wing.
Broad as the door of a rich man's vaulted treasure-chamber,
well-fitted with sturdy bars, so broad each wing of the bird
spread out on either side as it swept in through the city
flashing clear on the right before the king and queen.
All looked up, overjoyed—the people's spirits lifted.

 

  And the old man, rushing to climb aboard his chariot,
drove out through the gates and echoing colonnades.
The mules in the lead hauled out the four-wheeled wagon,
driven on by seasoned Idaeus. The horses came behind
as the old man cracked the lash and urged them fast
throughout the city with all his kinsmen trailing . . .
weeping their hearts out, as if he went to his death.
But once the two passed down through crowded streets
and out into open country, Priam's kin turned back,
his sons and in-laws straggling home to Troy.
But Zeus who beholds the world could hardly fail
to see the two men striking out across the plain.
As he watched the old man he filled with pity
and quickly summoned Hermes, his own dear son:
"Hermes—escorting men is your greatest joy,,
you above all the gods,
and you listen to the wish of those you favor.
So down you go. Down and conduct King Priam there
through Achaea's beaked ships, so none will see him,
none of the Argive fighters recognize him now,
not till he reaches Peleus' royal son."
So he decreed
and Hermes the giant-killing guide obeyed at once.
Under his feet he fastened the supple sandals,
never-dying gold, that wing him over the waves
and boundless earth with the rush of gusting winds.
He seized the wand that enchants the eyes of men
whenever Hermes wants, or wakes them up from sleep.
That wand in his grip he flew, the mighty giant-killer
touching down on Troy and the Hellespont in no time
and from there he went on foot, for all the world
like a young prince, sporting his first beard,
just in the prime and fresh warm pride of youth.
And now,
as soon as the two drove past the great tomb of Ilus
they drew rein at the ford to water mules and team.
A sudden darkness had swept across the earth
and Hermes was all but on them when the herald
looked up, saw him, shouted at once to Priam,
"Danger, my king—think fast! I see a man—
I'm afraid we'll both be butchered on the spot—
into the chariot, hurry! Run for our lives
or fling ourselves at his knees and beg for mercy!"

 

  The old man was stunned, in a swirl of terror,
the hairs stood bristling all over his gnarled body—
he stood there, staring dumbly. Not waiting for welcome
the running god of luck went straight up to Priam,
clasped the old king's hands and asked him warmly,
"Father—where do you drive these mules and team
through the godsent night while other mortals sleep?
Have you no fear of the Argives breathing hate and fury?
Here are your deadly enemies, camping close at hand.
Now what if one of them saw you, rolling blithely on
through the rushing night with so much tempting treasure—
how would you feel then? You're not so young yourself,
and the man who attends you here is far too old
to drive off an attacker spoiling for a fight.
But I would never hurt you—and what's more,
I'd beat off any man who'd do you harm:
you remind me of my dear father, to the life."

 

  And the old and noble Priam said at once,
"Our straits are hard, dear child, as you say.

 

 

But a god still holds his hands above me, even me.
Sending such a traveler here to meet me—
what a lucky omen! Look at your build . . .
your handsome face—a wonder. And such good sense—
your parents must be blissful as the gods!"

 

  The guide and giant-killer answered quickly,
"You're right, old man, all straight to the mark.
But come, tell me the truth now, point by point:
this treasure—a king's ransom—do you send it off
to distant, outland men, to keep it safe for you?
Or now do you all abandon sacred Troy,
all in panic-such was the man who died,
your finest, bravest man . . . your own son
who never failed in a fight against the Argives."

 

  But the old majestic Priam countered quickly,
"Who are you, my fine friend?—who are your parents?
How can you speak so well of my doomed son's fate?"

 

  And the guide and giant-killer answered staunchly,
"You're testing me, old man—asking of noble Hector.
Ah, how often I watched him battling on the lines
where men win glory, saw the man with my own eyes!
And saw him drive Achaeans against the ships that day
he kept on killing, cutting them down with slashing bronze
while we stood by and marveled—Achilles reined us in:
no fighting for us while he raged on at Agamemnon.
I am Achilles' aide, you see,
one and the same good warship brought us here.
I am a Myrmidon, and my father is Polyctor,
and a wealthy man he is, about as old as you . . .
He has six sons—I'm the seventh—we all shook lots
and it fell to me to join the armies here at Troy.

 

 

I've just come up from the ships to scout the plain—
at dawn the fiery-eyed Achaeans fight around the city.
They chafe, sitting in camp, so bent on battle now
the kings of Achaea cannot hold them back."

 

  And the old and noble Priam asked at once,
"If you really are the royal Achilles' aide,
please, tell me the whole truth, point by point.
My son—does he still lie by the beached ships,
or by now has the great Achilles hacked him
limb from limb and served him to his dogs?"

 

  The guide and giant-killer reassured him:
"So far, old man, no birds or dogs have eaten him.
No, there he lies—still there at Achilles' ship,
still intact in his shelters.
This is the twelfth day he's lain there, too,
but his body has not decayed, not in the least,
nor have the worms begun to gnaw his corpse,
the swarms that devour men who fall in battle.
True, dawn on fiery dawn he drags him round
his beloved comrade's tomb, drags him ruthlessly
but he cannot mutilate his body. It's marvelous—
go see for yourself how he lies there fresh as dew,
the blood washed away, and no sign of corruption.
All his wounds sealed shut, wherever they struck . . .
and many drove their bronze blades through his body.
Such pains the blissful gods are lavishing on your son,
dead man though he is—the gods love him dearly!"

 

  And the old man rejoiced at that, bursting out,
"O my child, how good it is to give the immortals
fit and proper gifts! Now take my son—
or was he all a dream? Never once in his halls
did he forget the gods who hold Olympus, never,
so now they remember him . . . if only after death.
Come, this handsome cup: accept it from me, I beg you!
Protect me, escort me now—if the gods will it so—
all the way till I reach Achilles' shelter."

 

  The guide and giant-killer refused him firmly,
"You test me again, old man, since I am young,
but you will not persuade me,
tempting me with a gift behind Achilles' back.
I fear the man, I'd die of shame to rob him—
just think of the trouble I might suffer later.
But I'd escort you with all the kindness in my heart,
all the way till I reached the shining hills of Argos
bound in a scudding ship or pacing you on foot—
and no marauder on earth, scorning your escort,
would dare attack you then."
  And the god of luck,
leaping onto the chariot right behind the team,
quickly grasped the whip and reins in his hands
and breathed fresh spirit into the mules and horses.
As they reached the trench and rampart round the, fleet,
the sentries had just begun to set out supper there
but the giant-killer plunged them all in sleep . . .
he spread the gates at once, slid back the bars
and ushered Priam in with his wagon-load of treasure.
Now, at last, they approached royal Achilles' shelter,
the tall, imposing lodge the Myrmidons built their king,
hewing planks of pine, and roofed it high with thatch,
gathering thick shaggy reeds from the meadow banks,
and round it built their king a spacious courtyard
fenced with close-set stakes. A single pine beam
held the gates, and it took three men to ram it home,
three to shoot the immense bolt back and spread the doors—
three average men. Achilles alone could ram it home himself.
But the god of luck now spread the gates for the old man,
drove in the glinting gifts for Peleus' swift son,
climbed down from behind the team and said to Priam,
"Old man, look, I am a god come down to you,
I am immortal Hermes—
my Father sent me here to be your escort.
But now I will hasten back. I will not venture
into Achilles' presence: it would offend us all
for a mortal man to host an immortal face-to-face.
But you go in yourself and clasp Achilles' knees,
implore him by his father, his mother with lovely hair,
by his own son-s-o you can stir his heart!"
With that urging
Hermes went his way to the steep heights of Olympus.
But Priam swung down to earth from the battle-car
and leaving Idaeus there to rein in mules and team,
the old king went straight up to the lodge
where Achilles dear to Zeus would always sit.
Priam found the warrior there inside . . .
many captains sitting some way off, but two,
veteran Automedon and the fine fighter Alcimus
were busy serving him. He had just finished dinner,
eating, drinking, and the table still stood near.
The majestic king of Troy slipped past the rest
and kneeling down beside Achilles, clasped his knees
and kissed his hands, those terrible, man-killing hands
that had slaughtered Priam's many sons in battle.
Awesome—as when the grip of madness seizes one
who murders a man in his own fatherland and, flees
abroad to foreign shores, to a wealthy, noble host,
and a sense of marvel runs through all who see him—
so Achilles marveled, beholding majestic Priam.
His men marveled too, trading startled glances.
But Priam prayed his heart out to Achilles:
"Remember your own father, great godlike Achilles—
as old as I am, past the threshold of deadly old age!
No doubt the countrymen round about him plague him now,
with no one there to defend him, beat away disaster.
No one-but at least he hears you're still alive
and his old heart rejoices, hopes rising, day by day,
to see his beloved son come sailing home from Troy.
But I—dear god, my life so cursed by fate . . .
I fathered hero sons in the wide realm of Troy
and now not a single one is left, I tell you.
Fifty sons I had when the sons of Achaea came,
nineteen born to me from a single mother's womb
and the rest by other women in the palace. Many,
most of them violent Ares cut the knees from under.
But one, one was left me, to guard my walls, my people—
the one you killed the other day, defending his fatherland,
my Hector! It's all for him I've come to the ships now,
to win him back from you-I bring a priceless ransom.
Revere the gods, Achilles! Pity me in my own right,
remember your own father! I deserve more pity . . .
I have endured what no one on earth has ever done before—
I put to my lips the hands of the man who killed my son."

 

  Those words stirred within Achilles a deep desire
to grieve for his own father. Taking the old man's hand
he gently moved him back. And overpowered by memory
both men gave way to grief. Priam wept freely
for man-killing Hector, throbbing, crouching
before Achilles' feet as Achilles wept himself,
now for his father, now for Patroclus once again,
and their sobbing rose and fell throughout the house.
Then, when brilliant Achilles had had his fill of tears
and the longing for it had left his mind and body,
he rose from his seat, raised the old man by the hand
and filled with pity now for his gray head and gray beard,
he spoke out winging words, flying straight to the heart:
"Poor man, how much you've borne—pain to break the spirit!
What daring brought you down to the ships, all alone,
to face the glance of the man who killed your sons,
so many fine brave boys? You have a heart of iron.
Come, please, sit down on this chair here .. .
Let us put our griefs to rest in our own hearts,
rake them up no more, raw as we are with mourning.
What good's to be won from tears that chill the spirit?
So the immortals spun our lives that we, we wretched men
live on to bear such torments—the gods live free of sorrows.
There are two great jars that stand on the floor of Zeus's halls
and hold his gifts, our miseries one, the other blessings.
When Zeus who loves the lightning mixes gifts for a man,
now he meets with misfortune, now good times in turn.
When Zeus dispenses gifts from the jar of sorrows only,
he makes a man an outcast—brutal, ravenous hunger
drives him down the face of the shining earth,
stalking far and wide, cursed by gods and men.
So with my father, Peleus. What glittering gifts
the gods rained down from the day that he was born!
He excelled all men in wealth and pride of place,
he lorded the Myrmidons, and mortal that he was,
they gave the man an immortal goddess for a wife.
Yes, but even on him the Father piled hardships,
no powerful race of princes born in his royal halls,
only a single son he fathered, doomed at birth,
cut off in the spring of life—
and I, I give the man no care as he grows old
since here I sit in Troy, far from my fatherland,
a grief to you, a grief to all your children . . .
And you too, old man, we hear you prospered once:
as far as Lesbos, Macar's kingdom, bounds to seaward,
Phrygia east and upland, the Hellespont vast and north—
that entire realm, they say, you lorded over once,
you excelled all men, old king, in sons and wealth.
But then the gods of heaven brought this agony on you—
ceaseless battles round your walls, your armies slaughtered.
You must bear up now. Enough of endless tears,
the pain that breaks the spirit.
Grief for your son will do no good at all.
You will never bring him back to life—
sooner,you must suffer something worse."

 

  But the old and noble Priam protested strongly:
"Don't 'make me sit on a chair, Achilles, Prince,
not while Hector lies uncared-for in your camp!
Give him back to me, now, no more delay—
I must see my son with my own eyes.
Accept the ransom I bring you, a king's ransom!
Enjoy it, all of it—return to your own native land,
safe and sound . . . since now you've spared my life."

 

  A dark glance—and the headstrong runner answered,
"No more, old man, don't tempt my wrath, not now!
My own mind's made up to give you back your son.
A messenger brought me word from Zeus-my mother,
Thetis who bore me, the Old Man of the Sea's daughter.
And what's more, I can see through you, Priam—
no hiding the fact from me: one of the gods
has led you down to Achaea's fast ships.
No man alive, not even a rugged young fighter,
would dare to venture into our camp. Never—
how could he slip past the sentries unchallenged?
Or shoot back the bolt of my gates with so much ease?
So don't anger me now. Don't stir my raging heart still more.
Or under my own roof I may not spare your, life, old man—
suppliant that you are—may break the laws of Zeus!"

 

  The old man was terrified. He obeyed the order.
But Achilles bounded out of doors like a lion—
not alone but flanked by his two aides-in-arms,
veteran Automedon and Alcimus, steady comrades,
Achilles' favorites next to the dead Patroclus.
They loosed from harness the horses and the mules,
they led the herald in, the old king's crier,
and sat him down on a bench. From the polished wagon
they lifted the priceless ransom brought for Hector's corpse
but they left behind two capes and a finely-woven shirt
to shroud the body well when Priam bore him home.
Then Achilles called the serving-women out:
"Bathe and anoint the body=
bear it aside first. Priam must not see his son."
He feared that, overwhelmed by the sight of Hector,
wild with grief, Priam might let his anger flare
and Achilles might fly into fresh rage himself,
cut the old man down and break the laws of Zeus.
So when the maids had bathed and anointed the body
sleek with olive oil and wrapped it round and round
in a braided battle-shirt and handsome battle-cape,
then Achilles lifted Hector up in his own arms
and laid him down on a bier, and comrades helped him


raise the bier and body onto the sturdy wagon . . .
Then with a groan he called his dear friend by name:
"Feel no anger at me, Patroclus, if you learn—
even there in the House of Death—I let his father
have Prince Hector back. He gave me worthy ransom
and you shall have your share from me, as always,
your fitting, lordly share."
So he vowed
and brilliant Achilles strode back to his shelter,
sat down on the well-carved chair that he had left,
at the far wall of the room, leaned toward Priam
and firmly spoke the words the king had come to hear:
"Your son is now set free, old man, as you requested.
Hector lies in state. With the first light of day
you will see for yourself as you convey him home.
Now, at last, let us turn our thoughts to supper.
Even Niobe with her lustrous hair remembered food,
though she saw a dozen children killed in her own halls,
six daughters and six sons in the pride and prime of youth.
True, lord Apollo killed the sons with his silver bow
and Artemis showering arrows killed the daughters.
Both gods were enraged at Niobe. Time and again
she placed herself on a par with their own mother,
Leto in her immortal beauty—how she insulted Leto:
'All you have borne is two, but I have borne so many!'
So, two as they were, they slaughtered all her children.
Nine days they lay in their blood, no one to bury them—
Cronus' son had turned the people into stone . . .
then on the tenth the gods of heaven interred them.
And Niobe, gaunt, worn to the bone with weeping,
turned her thoughts to food. And now, somewhere,
lost on the crags, on the lonely mountain slopes,
on Sipylus where, they say, the nymphs who live forever,
dancing along the Achelous River run to beds of rest—
there, struck into stone, Niobe still broods
on the spate of griefs the gods poured out to her.

 

  So come—we too, old king, must think of food.
Later you can mourn your beloved son once more,
when you bear him home to Troy, and you'll weep many tears."

 

  Never pausing, the swift runner sprang to his feet
and slaughtered a white sheep as comrades moved in
to skin the carcass quickly, dress the quarters well.
Expertly they cut the meat in pieces, pierced them with spits,
roasted them to a turn and pulled them off the fire.
Automedon brought the bread, set it out on the board
 


in ample wicker baskets. Achilles served the meat.
They reached out for the good things that lay at hand
and when they had put aside desire for food and drink,
Priam the son of Dardanus gazed at Achilles, marveling
now at the man's beauty, his magnificent build—
face-to-face he seemed a deathless god . . .
and Achilles gazed and marveled at Dardan Priam,
beholding his noble looks, listening to his words.
But once they'd had their fill of gazing at each other,
the old majestic Priam broke the silence first:
"Put me to bed quickly, Achilles, Prince.
Time to rest, to enjoy the sweet relief of sleep.
Not once have my eyes closed shut beneath my lids
from the day my son went down beneath your hands . . .
day and night I groan, brooding over the countless griefs,
groveling in the dung that fills my walled-in court.
But now, at long last, I have tasted food again
and let some glistening wine go down my throat.
Before this hour I had tasted nothing."
  He shook his head
as Achilles briskly told his men and serving-women
to make beds in the porch's shelter, to lay down
some heavy purple throws for the beds themselves
and over them spread some blankets, thick woolly robes,
a warm covering laid on top. Torches in hand,
they left the hall and fell to work at once
and in no time two good beds were spread and made.
Then Achilles nodded to Priam, leading the king on
with brusque advice: "Sleep outside, old friend,
in case some Achaean captain comes to visit.
They keep on coming now, huddling beside me,
making plans for battle—it's their duty.
But if one saw you here in the rushing dark night
he'd tell Agamemnon straightaway, our good commander.
Then you'd have real delay in ransoming the body.
One more point. Tell me, be precise about it—
how many days do you need to bury Prince Hector?
I will hold back myself
and keep the Argive armies back that long."

 

  And the old and noble Priam answered slowly,
"If you truly want me to give Prince Hector burial,
full, royal honors, you'd show me a great kindness,
Achilles, if you would do exactly as I say.
You know how crammed we are inside our city,
how far it is to the hills to haul in timber,
and our Trojans are afraid to make the journey.
Well, nine days we should mourn him in our halls,
on the tenth we'd bury Hector, hold the public feast,
on the eleventh build the barrow high above his body—
on the twelfth we'd fight again . . . if fight we must."

 

  The swift runner Achilles reassured him quickly:
"All will be done, old Priam, as you command.
I will hold our attack as long as you require."

 

  With that he clasped the old king by the wrist,
by the right hand, to free his heart from fear.
Then Priam and herald, minds set on the journey home,
bedded down for the night within the porch's shelter.
And deep in his sturdy well-built lodge Achilles slept
with Briseis in all her beauty sleeping by his side.

 

  Now the great array of gods and chariot-driving men
slept all night long, overcome by gentle sleep.
But sleep could never hold the running Escort—
Hermes kept on turning it over in his mind . . .
how could he convoy Priam clear of the ships,
unseen by devoted guards who held the gates?
Hovering at his head the Escort rose and spoke:
"Not a care in the world, old man? Look at you,
how you sleep in the midst of men who'd kill you—
and just because Achilles spared your life. Now, yes,
you've ransomed your dear son—for a king's ransom.
But wouldn't the sons you left behind be forced
to pay three times as much for you alive?
What if Atrides Agamemnon learns you're here—
what if the whole Achaean army learns you're here?"

 

  The old king woke in terror, roused the herald.
Hermes harnessed the mules and team. for both men,
drove them fast through the camp and no one saw them.

 

  Once they reached the ford where the river runs clear,
the strong, whirling Xanthus sprung of immortal Zeus,
Hermes went his way to the steep heights of Olympus
as Dawn flung out her golden robe across the earth,
and the two men, weeping, groaning, drove the team
toward Troy and the mules brought on the body.
No one saw them at first, neither man nor woman,
none before Cassandra, golden as goddess Aphrodite.
She had climbed to Pergamus heights and from that point
she saw her beloved father swaying tall in the chariot,
flanked by the herald, whose cry could rouse the city.
And Cassandra saw him too . . .
drawn by the mules and stretched out on his bier.
She screamed and her scream rang out through all Troy:
"Come, look down, you men of Troy, you Trojan women!
Behold Hector now-if you ever once rejoiced
to see him striding home, home alive from battle!
He was the greatest joy of Troy and all our people!"

 

  Her cries plunged Troy into uncontrollable grief
and not a man or woman was left inside the walls.
They streamed out at the gates to meet Priam
bringing in the body of the dead. Hector—
his loving wife and noble mother were first
to fling themselves on the wagon rolling on,
the first to tear their hair, embrace his head
and a wailing throng of people milled around them.
And now, all day long till the setting sun went down
they would have wept for Hector there before the gates
if the old man, steering the car, had not commanded,
"Let me through with the mules! Soon, in a moment,
you can have your fill of tears—once I've brought him home."

 

  So he called and the crowds fell back on either side,
making way for the wagon. Once they had borne him
into the famous halls, they laid his body down
on his large carved bed and set beside him singers
to lead off the laments, and their voices rose in grief—
they lifted the dirge high as, the women wailed in answer.
And white-armed Andromache led their songs of sorrow,
cradling the head of Hector, man-killing Hector
gently in her arms: "0 my husband . . .
cut off from life so young! You leave me a widow,
lost in the royal halls-and the boy only a baby,
the son we bore together, you and I so doomed.
I cannot think he will ever come to manhood.
Long before that the city will be sacked,
plundered top to bottom! Because you are dead,
her great guardian, you who always defended Troy,
who kept her loyal wives and helpless children safe,
all who will soon be carried off in the hollow ships
and I with them—
And you, my child, will follow me
to labor, somewhere, at harsh, degrading work,
slaving under some heartless master's eye—that,
or some Achaean marauder will seize you by the arm
and hurl you headlong down from the ramparts—horrible death—
enraged at you because Hector once cut down his brother,
his father or his son, yes, hundreds of armed Achaeans
 


gnawed the dust of the world, crushed by Hector's hands!
Your father, remember, was no man of mercy . . .
not in the horror of battle, and that is why
the whole city of Troy mourns you now, my Hector—
you've brought your parents accursed tears and grief
but to me most of all you've left the horror, the heartbreak!
For you never died in bed and stretched your arms to me
or said some last word from the heart I can remember,
always, weeping for you through all my nights and days!"

 

  Her voice rang out in tears and the women wailed in answer
and Hecuba led them now in a throbbing chant of sorrow:
"Hector, dearest to me by far of all my sons . . .
and dear to the gods while we still shared this life—
and they cared about you still, I see, even after death.
Many the sons I had whom the swift runner Achilles
caught and shipped on the barren salt sea as slaves
to Samos, to Imbros, to Lemnos shrouded deep in mist!
But you, once he slashed away your life with his brazen spear
he dragged you time and again around his comrade's tomb,
Patroclus whom you killed—not that he brought Patroclus
back to life by that. But I have you with me now . . .
fresh as the morning dew you lie in the royal halls
like one whom Apollo, lord of the silver bow,
has approached and shot to death with gentle shafts."

 

  Her voice rang out in tears and an endless wail rose up
and Helen, the third in turn, led their songs of sorrow:
"Hector! Dearest to me of all my husband's brothers—
my husband, Paris, magnificent as a god . . .
he was the one who brought me here to Troy—
Oh how I wish I'd died before that day!
But this, now, is the twentieth year for me
since I sailed here and forsook my own native land,
yet never once did I hear from you a taunt, an insult.
But if someone else in the royal halls would curse me,
one of your brothers or sisters or brothers' wives
trailing their long robes, even your own mother—
not your father, always kind as my own father—
why, you'd restrain them with words, Hector,
you'd win them to my side . . .
you with your gentle temper, all your gentle words.
And so in the same breath I mourn for you and me,
my doom-struck, harrowed heart! Now there is no one left
in the wide realm of Troy, no friend to treat me kindly—
all the countrymen cringe from me in loathing!"

 

  Her voice rang out in tears and vast throngs wailed
and old King Priam rose and gave his people orders:
"Now, you men of Troy, haul timber into the city!
Have no fear of an Argive ambush packed with danger—
Achilles vowed, when he sent me home from the black ships,
not to do us harm till the twelfth dawn arrives."

 

  At his command they harnessed oxen and mules to wagons,
they assembled before the city walls with all good speed
and for nine days hauled in a boundless store of timber.
But when the tenth Dawn brought light to the mortal world
they carried gallant Hector forth, weeping tears,
and they placed his corpse aloft the pyre's crest,
flung a torch and set it all aflame.
At last,
when young Dawn with her rose-red fingers shone once more,
the people massed around illustrious Hector's pyre . . .
And once they'd gathered, crowding the meeting grounds,
they first put out the fires with glistening wine,
wherever the flames still burned in all their fury.
Then they collected the white bones of Hector—
all his brothers, his friends-in-arms, mourning,
and warm tears came streaming down their cheeks.
They placed the bones they found in a golden chest,
shrouding them round and round in soft purple cloths.
They quickly lowered the chest in a deep, hollow grave
and over it piled a copee of huge stones closely set,
then hastily heaped a barrow, posted lookouts all around
for fear the Achaean combat troops would launch their attack
before the time agreed. And once they'd heaped the mound
they turned back home to Troy, and gathering once again
they shared a splendid funeral feast in Hector's honor,
held in the house of Priam, king by will of Zeus.

 

  And so the Trojans buried Hector breaker of horses.

 



Athena Inspires 
the Prince 



Sing to me of the man, Muse, the man of twists and turns ... 
driven time and again off course, once he had plundered 
the hallowed heights of Troy. 
Many cities of men he saw and learned their minds, 
many pains he suffered, heartsick on the open sea, 
fighting to save his life and bring his comrades home. 
But he could not save them from disaster, hard as he strove — 
the recklessness of their own ways destroyed them all, 
the blind fools, they devoured the cattle of the Sun 
and the Sungod blotted out the day of their return. 
Launch out on his story. Muse, daughter of Zeus, 
start from where you will — sing for our time too. 

By now, 

all the survivors, all who avoided headlong death 
were safe at home, escaped the wars and waves. 



But one man alone ... 

his heart set on his wife and his return — Calypso, 

the bewitching nymph, the lustrous goddess, held him back, 

deep in her arching caverns, craving him for a husband. 

But then, when the wheeling seasons brought the year around, 

that year spun out by the gods when he should reach his home, 

Ithaca — though not even there would he be free of trials, 

even among his loved ones — then every god took pity, 

all except Poseidon. He raged on, seething against 

the great Odysseus till he reached his native land. 

But now 

Poseidon had gone to visit the Ethiopians worlds away, 
Ethiopians off at the farthest limits of mankind, 
a people split in two, one part where the Sungod sets 
and part where the Sungod rises. There Poseidon went 
to receive an offering, bulls and rams by the hundred — 
far away at the feast the Sea-lord sat and took his pleasure. 
But the other gods, at home in Olympian Zeus's halls, 
met for full assembly there, and among them now 
the father of men and gods was first to speak, 
sorely troubled, remembering handsome Aegisthus, 
the man Agamemnon's son, renowned Orestes, killed. 
Recalling Aegisthus, Zeus harangued the immortal powers: 
"Ah how shameless — ^the way these mortals blame the gods. 
From us alone, they say, come all their miseries, yes, 
but they themselves, with their own reckless ways, 
compound their pains beyond their proper share. 
Look at Aegisthus now ... 

above and beyond Azs share he stole Atrides' wife, 
he murdered the warlord coming home from Troy 
though he knew it meant his own total ruin. 
Far in advance we told him so ourselves, 
dispatching the guide, the giant-killer Hermes. 
'Don't murder the man,' he said, 'don't court his wife. 
Beware, revenge will come from Orestes, Agamemnon's son, 
that day he comes of age and longs for his native land.' 
So Hermes warned, with all the good will in the world. 



but would Aegisthus' hardened heart give way? 
Now he pays the price — all at a single stroke." 

And sparkling-eyed Athena drove the matter home: 
"Father, son of Cronus, our high and mighty king, 
surely he goes down to a death he earned in full! 
Let them all die so, all who do such things. 
But my heart breaks for Odysseus, 
that seasoned veteran cursed by fate so long — 
far from his loved ones still, he suffers torments 
off on a wave-washed island rising at the center of the seas. 
A dark wooded island, and there a goddess makes her home, 
daughter of Atlas, wicked Titan who sounds the deep 
in all its depths, whose shoulders lift on high 
the colossal pillars thrusting earth and sky apart. 
Atlas' daughter it is who holds Odysseus captive, 
luckless man — despite his tears, forever trying 
to spellbind his heart with suave, seductive words 
and wipe all thought of Ithaca from his mind. 
But he, straining for no more than a glimpse 
of hearth-smoke drifting up from his own land, 
Odysseus longs to die ... 

Olympian Zeus, 
have you no care for him 'm your lofty heart? 
Did he never win your favor with sacrifices 
burned beside the ships on the broad plain of Troy? 
Why, Zeus, why so dead set against Odysseus?" 

"My child," Zeus who marshals the thunderheads replied, 
"what nonsense you let slip through your teeth. Now, 
how on earth could 1 forget Odysseus? Great Odysseus 
who excels all men in wisdom, excels in offerings too 
he gives the immortal gods who rule the vaulting skies? 
No, it's the Earth-Shaker, Poseidon, unappeased, 
forever fuming against him for the Cyclops 
whose giant eye he blinded: godlike Polyphemus, 
towering over all the Cyclops' clans in power. 



The nymph Thoosa bore him, daughter of Phorcys, 
lord of the barren salt sea — she met Poseidon 
once in his vaulted caves and they made love. 
And now for his blinded son the earthquake god — 
though he won't quite kill Odysseus — 
drives him far off course from native land. 
But come, all of us here put heads together now, 
work out his journey home so Odysseus can return. 
Lord Poseidon, 1 trust, will let his anger go. 
How can he stand his ground against the will 
of all the gods at once — one god alone?" 

Athena, her eyes flashing bright, exulted, 
"Father, son of Cronus, our high and mighty king! 
If now it really pleases the blissful gods 
that wise Odysseus shall return — home at last — 
let us dispatch the guide and giant-killer Hermes 
down to Ogygia Island, down to announce at once 
to the nymph with lovely braids our fixed decree: 
Odysseus journeys home — ^the exile must return! 
While 1 myself go down to Ithaca, rouse his son 
to a braver pitch, inspire his heart with courage 
to summon the flowing-haired Achaeans to full assembly, 
speak his mind to all those suitors, slaughtering on and on 
his droves of sheep and shambling longhorn cattle. 
Next 1 will send him off to Sparta and sandy Pylos, 
there to learn of his dear father's journey home. 
Perhaps he will hear some news and make his name 
throughout the mortal world. " 

So Athena vowed 
and under her feet she fastened the supple sandals, 
ever-glowing gold, that wing her over the waves 
and boundless earth with the rush of gusting winds. 
She seized the rugged spear tipped with a bronze point — 
weighted, heavy, the massive shaft she wields to break the lines 
of heroes the mighty Father's daughter storms against. 
And down she swept from Olympus' craggy peaks 
and lit on Ithaca, standing tall at Odysseus' gates. 



the threshold of his court. Gripping her bronze spear, 
she looked for all the world like a stranger now, 
like Mentes, lord of the Taphians. 
There she found the swaggering suitors, just then 
amusing themselves with rolling dice before the doors, 
lounging on hides of oxen they had killed themselves. 
While heralds and brisk attendants bustled round them, 
some at the mixing-bowls, mulling wine and water, 
others wiping the tables down with sopping sponges, 
setting them out in place, still other servants 
jointed and carved the great sides of meat. 

First by far to see her was Prince Telemachus, 
sitting among the suitors, heart obsessed with grief. 
He could almost see his magnificent father, here ... 
in the mind's eye — if only might drop from the clouds 
and drive these suitors all in a rout throughout the halls 
and regain his pride of place and rule his own domains! 
Daydreaming so as he sat among the suitors, 
he glimpsed Athena now 
and straight to the porch he went, mortified 
that a guest might still be standing at the doors. 
Pausing beside her there, he clasped her right hand 
and relieving her at once of her long bronze spear, 
met her with winged words: "Greetings, stranger! 
Here in our house you'll find a royal welcome. 
Have supper first, then tell us what you need." 

He led the way and Pallas Athena followed. 
Once in the high-roofed hall, he took her lance 
and fixed it firm in a burnished rack against 
a sturdy pillar, there where row on row of spears, 
embattled Odysseus' spears, stood stacked and waiting. 
Then he escorted her to a high, elaborate chair of honor, 
over it draped a cloth, and here he placed his guest 
with a stool to rest her feet. But for himself 
he drew up a low reclining chair beside her, 
richly painted, clear of the press of suitors. 



concerned his guest, offended by their uproar, 

might shrink from food in the midst of such a mob. 

He hoped, what's more, to ask him about his long-lost father. 

A maid brought water soon in a graceful golden pitcher 

and over a silver basin tipped it out 

so they might rinse their hands, 

then pulled a gleaming table to their side. 

A staid housekeeper brought on bread to serve them, 

appetizers aplenty too, lavish with her bounty. 

A carver lifted platters of meat toward them, 

meats of every sort, and set beside them golden cups 

and time and again a page came round and poured them wine. 

But now the suitors trooped in with all their swagger 
and took their seats on low and high-backed chairs. 
Heralds poured water over their hands for rinsing, 
serving maids brought bread heaped high in trays 
and the young men brimmed the mixing-bowls with wine. 
They reached out for the good things that lay at hand, 
and when they 'd put aside desire for food and drink 
the suitors set their minds on other pleasures, 
song and dancing, all that crowns a feast. 
A herald placed an ornate lyre in Phemius' hands, 
the bard who always performed among them there; 
they forced the man to sing. 

A rippling prelude — 
and no sooner had he struck up his rousing song 
than Telemachus, head close to Athena's sparkling eyes, 
spoke low to his guest so no one else could hear: 
"Dear stranger, would you be shocked by what 1 say? 
Look at them over there. Not a care in the world, 
just lyres and tunes! Easy for them, all right, 
they feed on another's goods and go scot-free — 
a man whose white bones lie strewn in the rain somewhere, 
rotting away on land or rolling down the ocean's salty swells. 
But that man — if they caught sight of him home in Ithaca, 
by god, they 'd all pray to be faster on their feet 
than richer in bars of gold and heavy robes. 



But now, no use, he's died a wretched death. 
No comfort's left for us ... not even if 
someone, somewhere, says he's coming home. 
The day of his return will never dawn. 

Enough. 

Tell me about yourself now, clearly, point by point. 

Who are you? where are you from? your city? your parents? 

What sort of vessel brought you? Why did the sailors 

land you here in Ithaca? Who did they say they are? 

1 hardly think you came this way on foot! 

And tell me this for a fact — 1 need to know — 

is this your first time here? Or are you a friend of father's, 

a guest from the old days? Once, crowds of other men 

would come to our house on visits — visitor that he was, 

when he walked among the living." 

Her eyes glinting, 
goddess Athena answered, "My whole story, of course, 
I'll tell it point by point. Wise old Anchialus 
was my father. My own name is Mentes, 
lord of the Taphian men who love their oars. 
And here I've come, just now, with ship and crew, 
sailing the wine-dark sea to foreign ports of call, 
to Temese, out for bronze — our cargo gleaming iron. 
Our ship lies moored off farmlands far from town, 
riding in Rithron Cove, beneath Mount Nion's woods. 
As for the ties between your father and myself, 
we've been friends forever, I'm proud to say, 
and he would bear me out 
if you went and questioned old lord Laertes. 
He, 1 gather, no longer ventures into town 
but lives a life of hardship, all to himself, 
off on his farmstead with an aged serving-woman 
who tends him well, who gives him food and drink 
when weariness has taken hold of his withered limbs 
from hauling himself along his vineyard's steep slopes. 
And now I've come — and why? 1 heard that he was back ... 
your father, that is. But no, the gods thwart his passage. 
Yet 1 tell you great Odysseus is not dead. He's still alive. 



somewhere in this wide world, held captive, out at sea 
on a wave-washed island, and hard men, savages, 
somehow hold him back against his will. 

Wait, 

I'll make you a prophecy, one the immortal gods 
have planted in my mind — it will come true, 1 think, 
though I'm hardly a seer or know the flights of birds. 
He won't be gone long from the native land he loves, 
not even if iron shackles bind your father down. 
He's plotting a way to journey home at last; 
he's never at a loss. 

But come, please, 
tell me about yourself now, point by point. 
You're truly Odysseus' son? You've sprung up so! 
Uncanny resemblance ... the head, and the fine eyes — 
1 see him now. How often we used to meet in the old days 
before he embarked for Troy, where other Argive captains, 
all the best men, sailed in the long curved ships. 
From then to this very day 
I've not set eyes on Odysseus or he on me. " 

And young Telemachus cautiously replied, 
"I'll try, my friend, to give you a frank answer. 
Mother has always told me I'm his son, it's true, 
but 1 am not so certain. Who, on his own, 
has ever really known who gave him life? 
Would to god I'd been the son of a happy man 
whom old age overtook in the midst of his possessions! 
Now, think of the most unlucky mortal ever born — 
since you ask me, yes, they say 1 am his son." 

"Still," the clear-eyed goddess reassured him, 
"trust me, the gods have not marked out your house 
for such an unsung future, 
not if Penelope has borne a son like you. 
But tell me about all this and spare me nothing. 
What's this banqueting, this crowd carousing here? 
And what part do you play yourself? Some wedding-feast. 



some festival? Hardly a potluck supper, 1 would say. 
How obscenely they lounge and swagger here, look, 
gorging in your house. Why, any man of sense 
who chanced among them would be outraged, 
seeing such behavior. " 

Ready Telemachus 
took her up at once: "Well, my friend, 
seeing you want to probe and press the question, 
once this house was rich, no doubt, beyond reproach 
when the man you mentioned still lived here, at home. 
Now the gods have reversed our fortunes with a vengeance — 
wiped that man from the earth like no one else before. 
1 would never have grieved so much about his death 
if he'd gone down with comrades off in Troy 
or died in the arms of loved ones, 
once he had wound down the long coil of war. 
Then all united Achaea would have raised his tomb 
and he'd have won his son great fame for years to come. 
But now the whirlwinds have ripped him away, no fame for him! 
He's lost and gone now — out of sight, out of mind — and 1 ... 
he's left me tears and grief. Nor do 1 rack my heart 
and grieve for him alone. No longer. Now the gods 
have invented other miseries to plague me. 

Listen. 

All the nobles who rule the islands round about, 
Dulichion, and Same, and wooded Zacynthus too, 
and all who lord it in rocky Ithaca as well — 
down to the last man they court my mother, 
they lay waste my house! And mother ... 
she neither rejects a marriage she despises 
nor can she bear to bring the courting to an end — 
while they continue to bleed my household white. 
Soon — you wait — ^they'll grind /nedown as well." 

"Shameful!"— 
brimming with indignation, Pallas Athena broke out. 
"Oh how much you need Odysseus, gone so long — 
how (C/lay hands on all these brazen suitors! 
If only he would appear, now. 



at his house's outer gates and take his stand, 

armed with his helmet, shield and pair of spears, 

as strong as the man I glimpsed that first time 

in our own house, drinking wine and reveling there ... 

just come in from Ephyra, visiting Ilus, Mermerus' son. 

Odysseus sailed that way, you see, in his swift trim ship, 

hunting deadly poison to smear on his arrows' bronze heads. 

Ilus refused — he feared the wrath of the everlasting gods — 

but father, so fond of him, gave him all he wanted. 

If only ^Aa^ Odysseus sported with these suitors, 

a blood wedding, a quick death would take the lot! 

True, but all lies in the lap of the great gods, 

whether or not he'll come and pay them back, 

here, in his own house. 

But you, 1 urge you, 
think how to drive these suitors from your halls. 
Come now, listen closely. Take my words to heart. 
At daybreak summon the island's lords to full assembly, 
give your orders to all and call the gods to witness: 
tell the suitors to scatter, each to his own place. 
As for your mother, if the spirit moves her to marry, 
let her go back to her father's house, a man of power. 
Her kin will arrange the wedding, provide the gifts, 
the array that goes with a daughter dearly loved. 

For you, 

1 have some good advice, if only you will accept it. 
Fit out a ship with twenty oars, the best in sight, 
sail in quest of news of your long-lost father. 
Someone may tell you something 
or you may catch a rumor straight from Zeus, 
rumor that carries news to men like nothing else. 
First go down to Pylos, question old King Nestor, 
then cross over to Sparta, to red-haired Menelaus, 
of all the bronze-armored Achaeans the last man back. 
Now, if you hear your father's alive and heading home, 
hard-pressed as you are, brave out one more year. 
If you hear he's dead, no longer among the living, 
then back you come to the native land you love. 



raise his grave-mound, build his honors high 
with the full funeral rites that he deserves — 
and give your mother to another husband. 

Then, 

once you've sealed those matters, seen them through, 

think hard, reach down deep in your heart and soul 

for a way to kill these suitors in your house, 

by stealth or in open combat. 

You must not cling to your boyhood any longer — 

it's time you were a man. Haven't you heard 

what glory Prince Orestes won throughout the world 

when he killed that cunning, murderous Aegisthus, 

who'd killed his famous father? 

And you, my friend — 
how tall and handsome 1 see you now — be brave, you too, 
so men to come will sing your praises down the years. 
But now 1 must go back to my swift trim ship 
and all my shipmates, chafing there, I'm sure, 
waiting for my return. It all rests with you. 
Take my words to heart." 

"Oh stranger," 
heedful Telemachus replied, "indeed 1 will. 
You've counseled me with so much kindness now, 
like a father to a son. 1 won't forget a word. 
But come, stay longer, keen as you are to sail, 
so you can bathe and rest and lift your spirits, 
then go back to your ship, delighted with a gift, 
a prize of honor, something rare and fine 
as a keepsake from myself. The kind of gift 
a host will give a stranger, friend to friend." 

Her eyes glinting, Pallas declined in haste: 
"Not now. Don't hold me here. 1 long to be on my way. 
As for the gift — whatever you'd give in kindness — 
save it for my return so 1 can take it home. 
Choose something rare and fine, and a good reward 
that gift is going to bring you." 

With that promise. 



off and away Athena the bright-eyed goddess flew 

Uke a bird in soaring flight 

but left his spirit filled with nerve and courage, 

charged with his father's memory more than ever now. 

He felt his senses quicken, overwhelmed with wonder — 

this was a god, he knew it well and made at once 

for the suitors, a man like a god himself. 

Amidst them still 

the famous bard sang on, and they sat in silence, listening 
as he performed The Achaeans' Journey Home from Troy, 
all the blows Athena doomed them to endure. 

And now, 

from high above in her room and deep in thought, 

she caught his inspired strains ... 

Icarius' daughter Penelope, wary and reserved, 

and down the steep stair from her chamber she descended, 

not alone: two of her women followed close behind. 

That radiant woman, once she reached her suitors, 

drawing her glistening veil across her cheeks, 

paused now where a column propped the sturdy roof, 

with one of her loyal handmaids stationed either side. 

Suddenly, dissolving in tears and bursting through 

the bard's inspired voice, she cried out, "Phemius! 

So many other songs you know to hold us spellbound, 

works of the gods and men that singers celebrate. 

Sing one of those as you sit beside them here 

and they drink their wine in silence. 

But break off this song — 
the unendurable song that always rends the heart inside me ... 
the unforgettable grief, it wounds me most of all! 
How 1 long for my husband — alive in memory, always, 
that great man whose fame resounds through Hellas 
right to the depths of Argos!" 

"Why, mother," 
poised Telemachus put in sharply, "why deny 
our devoted bard the chance to entertain us 
any way the spirit stirs him on? 
Bards are not to blame — 



Zeus is to blame. He deals to each and every 
laborer on this earth whatever doom he pleases. 
Why fault the bard if he sings the Argives' harsh fate? 
It's always the latest song, the one that echoes last 
in the listeners' ears, that people praise the most. 
Courage, mother. Harden your heart, and listen. 
Odysseus was scarcely the only one, you know, 
whose journey home was blotted out at Troy. 
Others, so many others, died there too. 

So, mother, 

go back to your quarters. Tend to your own tasks, 
the distaff and the loom, and keep the women 
working hard as well. As for giving orders, 
men will see to that, but 1 most of all: 
/hold the reins of power in this house. " 

Astonished, 

she withdrew to her own room. She took to heart 
the clear good sense in what her son had said. 
Climbing up to the lofty chamber with her women, 
she fell to weeping for Odysseus, her beloved husband, 
till watchful Athena sealed her eyes with welcome sleep. 

But the suitors broke into uproar through the shadowed halls, 
all of them lifting prayers to lie beside her, share her bed, 
until discreet Telemachus took command: "You suitors 
who plague my mother, you, you insolent, overweening ... 
for this evening let us dine and take our pleasure, 
no more shouting now. What a fine thing it is 
to listen to such a bard as we have here — 
the man sings like a god. 

But at first light 
we all march forth to assembly, take our seats 
so 1 can give my orders and say to you straight out: 
You must leave my palace! See to your feasting elsewhere, 
devour your own possessions, house to house by turns. 
But if you decide the fare is better, richer here, 
destroying one man's goods and going scot-free, 
all right then, carve away! 



But I'll cry out to the everlasting gods in hopes 

that Zeus will pay you back with a vengeance — all of you 

destroyed in my house while /go scot-free myself! " 

So Telemachus declared. And they all bit their lips, 
amazed the prince could speak with so much daring. 

Eupithes' son Antinous broke their silence: 
"Well, Telemachus, only the gods could teach you 
to sound so high and mighty! Such brave talk. 
1 pray that Zeus will never make youVinq of Ithaca, 
though your father's crown is no doubt yours by birth." 

But cool-headed Telemachus countered firmly: 
"Antinous, even though my words may offend you, 
I'd be happy to take the crown if Zeus presents it. 
You think that nothing worse could befall a man? 
It's really not so bad to be a king. All at once 
your palace grows in wealth, your honors grow as well. 
But there are hosts of other Achaean princes, look — 
young and old, crowds of them on our island here — 
and any one of the lot might hold the throne, 
now great Odysseus is dead ... 
But /77be lord of my own house and servants, 
all that King Odysseus won for me by force." 

And now Eurymachus, Polybus' son, stepped in: 
"Surely this must lie in the gods' lap, Telemachus — 
which Achaean will lord it over seagirt Ithaca. 
Do hold on to your own possessions, rule your house. 
God forbid that anyone tear your holdings from your hands 
while men still live in Ithaca. 

But about your guest, 
dear boy, 1 have some questions. Where does he come from? 
Where's his country, his birth, his father's old estates? 
Did he bring some news of your father, his return? 
Or did he come on business of his own? 
How he leapt to his feet and off he went! 



No waiting around for proper introductions. 

And no mean man, not by the looks of him, I'd say." 

"Eurymachus," Telemachus answered shrewdly, 
"clearly my father 's journey home is lost forever. 
1 no longer trust in rumors — rumors from the blue — 
nor bother with any prophecy, when mother calls 
some wizard into the house to ask him questions. 
As for the stranger though, 
the man's an old family friend, from Taphos, 
wise Anchialus' son. He says his name is Mentes, 
lord of the Taphian men who love their oars. " 

So he said 

but deep in his mind he knew the immortal goddess. 

Now the suitors turned to dance and song, 

to the lovely beat and sway, 

waiting for dusk to come upon them there ... 

and the dark night came upon them, lost in pleasure. 

Finally, to bed. Each to his own house. 

Telemachus, 
off to his bedroom built in the fine courtyard — 
a commanding, lofty room set well apart — 
retired too, his spirit swarming with misgivings. 
His devoted nurse attended him, bearing a glowing torch, 
Eurycleia the daughter of Ops, Pisenor's son. 
Laertes had paid a price for the woman years ago, 
still in the bloom of youth. He traded twenty oxen, 
honored her on a par with his own loyal wife at home 
but fearing the queen's anger, never shared her bed. 
She was his grandson's escort now and bore a torch, 
for she was the one of all the maids who loved 
the prince the most — she'd nursed him as a baby. 
He spread the doors of his snug, well-made room, 
sat down on the bed and pulled his soft shirt off, 
tossed it into the old woman's conscientious hands, 
and after folding it neatly, patting it smooth, 
she hung it up on a peg beside his corded bed, 
then padded from the bedroom. 



drawing the door shut with the silver hook, 
sliding the door bolt home with its rawhide strap. 
There all night long, wrapped in a sheep's warm fleece, 
he weighed in his mind the course Athena charted. 



 



Telemachus 
Sets Sail 



when young Dawn with her rose-red fingers shone once more 

the true son of Odysseus sprang from bed and dressed, 

over his shoulder he slung his well-honed sword, 

fastened rawhide sandals under his smooth feet 

and stepped from his bedroom, handsome as a god. 

At once he ordered heralds to cry out loud and clear 

and summon the flowing-haired Achaeans to full assembly. 

Their cries rang out. The people filed in quickly. 

When they'd grouped, crowding the meeting grounds, 

Telemachus strode in too, a bronze spear in his grip 

and not alone: two sleek hounds went trotting at his heels. 

And Athena lavished a marvelous splendor on the prince 

so the people all gazed in wonder as he came forward, 

the elders making way as he took his father's seat. 

The first to speak was an old lord, Aegyptius, 



stooped with age, who knew the world by heart. 
For one dear son had sailed with King Odysseus, 
bound in the hollow ships to the stallion-land of Troy — 
the spearman Antiphus — but the brutal Cyclops killed him, 
trapped in his vaulted cave, the last man the monster ate. 
Three other sons he had: one who mixed with the suitors, 
Eurynomus, and two kept working their father's farms. 
Still, he never forgot the soldier, desolate in his grief. 
In tears for the son he lost, he rose and said among them, 
"Hear me, men of Ithaca. Hear what 1 have to say. 
Not once have we held assembly, met in session 
since King Odysseus sailed in the hollow ships. 
Who has summoned us now — one of the young men, 
one of the old-timers? What crisis spurs him on? 
Some news he's heard of an army on the march, 
word he's caught firsthand so he can warn us now? 
Or some other public matter he'll disclose and argue? 
He's a brave man, I'd say. God be with him, too! 
May Zeus speed him on to a happy end, 
whatever his heart desires!" 

Winning words 
with a lucky ring. Odysseus' son rejoiced; 
the boy could sit no longer — fired up to speak, 
he took his stand among the gathered men. 
The herald Pisenor, skilled in custom's ways, 
put the staff in his hand, and then the prince, 
addressing old Aegyptius first, led off with, "Sir, 
that man is not far off — you'll soon see for yourself — 
/was the one who called us all together. 
Something wounds me deeply ... 
not news I've heard of an army on the march, 
word I've caught firsthand so 1 can warn you now, 
or some other public matter I'll disclose and argue. 
No, the crisis is my own. Trouble has struck my house — 
a double blow. First, 1 have lost my noble father 
who ruled among you years ago, each of you here, 
and kindly as a father to his children. 

But now this. 



a worse disaster that soon will grind my house down, 
ruin it all, and all my worldly goods in the bargain. 
Suitors plague my mother — against her will — 
sons of the very men who are your finest here! 
They'd sooner die than approach her father's house 
so Icarius himself might see to his daughter's bridal, 
hand her to whom he likes, whoever meets his fancy. 
Not they — they infest our palace day and night, 
they butcher our cattle, our sheep, our fat goats, 
feasting themselves sick, swilling our glowing wine 
as if there's no tomorrow — all of it, squandered. 
Now we have no man like Odysseus in command 
to drive this curse from the house. We ourselves? 
We're hardly the ones to fight them off. All we'd do 
is parade our wretched weakness. A boy inept at battle. 
Oh I'd swing to attack if 1 had the power in me. 
By god, it's intolerable, what they do — disgrace, 
my house a shambles! 

You should be ashamed yourselves, 
mortified in the face of neighbors living round about! 
Fear the gods' wrath — before they wheel in outrage 
and make these crimes recoil on your heads. 
1 beg you by Olympian Zeus, by Themis too, 
who sets assemblies free and calls us into session — 
stop, my friends! Leave me alone to pine away in anguish ... 
Unless, of course, you think my noble father Odysseus 
did the Achaean army damage, deliberate harm, 
and to pay me back you'd do me in, deliberately 
setting these parasites against me. Better for me 
if youynere devouring all my treasure, all my cattle — 
if you were the ones, we'd make amends in no time. 
We'd approach you for reparations round the town, 
demanding our goods till you'd returned the lot. 
But now, look, you load my heart with grief — 
there's nothing 1 can do!" 

Filled with anger, 
down on the ground he dashed the speaker's scepter — 
bursting into tears. Pity seized the assembly. 



All just sat there, silent ... 

no one had the heart to reply with harshness. 

Only Antinous, who found it in himself to say, 

"So high and mighty, Telemachus — such unbridled rage! 

Well now, fling your accusations at us? 

Think to pin the blame on us?Yo\x think again. 

It's not the suitors here who deserve the blame, 

it's your own dear mother, the matchless queen of cunning. 

Look here. For three years now, getting on to four, 

she's played it fast and loose with all our hearts, 

building each man's hopes — 

dangUng promises, dropping hints to each — 

but all the while with something else in mind. 

rA/5 was her latest masterpiece of guile: 

she set up a great loom in the royal halls 

and she began to weave, and the weaving finespun, 

the yarns endless, and she would lead us on: 'Young men, 

my suitors, now that King Odysseus is no more, 

go slowly, keen as you are to marry me, until 

1 can finish off this web ... 

so my weaving won't all fray and come to nothing. 

This is a shroud for old lord Laertes, for that day 

when the deadly fate that lays us out at last will take him down. 

1 dread the shame my countrywomen would heap upon me, 

yes, if a man of such wealth should lie in state 

without a shroud for cover.' 

Her very words, 
and despite our pride and passion we believed her. 
So by day she'd weave at her great and growing web — 
by night, by the light of torches set beside her, 
she would unravel all she'd done. Three whole years 
she deceived us blind, seduced us with this scheme ... 
Then, when the wheeling seasons brought the fourth year on, 
one of her women, in on the queen's secret, told the truth 
and we caught her in the act — unweaving her gorgeous web. 
So she finished it off. Against her will. We forced her. 



Now Telemachus, here is how the suitors answer you — 
you burn it in your mind, you and all our people: 
send your mother back! Direct her to marry 
whomever her father picks, whoever pleases her. 
So long as she persists in tormenting us, 
quick to exploit the gifts Athena gave her — 
a skilled hand for elegant work, a fine mind 
and subtle wiles too — we've never heard the like, 
not even in old stories sung of all Achaea's 
well-coifed queens who graced the years gone by: 
Mycenae crowned with garlands. Tyro and Alcmena ... 
Not one could touch Penelope for intrigue, 
but in this case she intrigued beyond all limits. 
So, we will devour your worldly goods and wealth 
as long as sAf holds out, holds to that course 
the gods have charted deep inside her heart. 
Great renown she wins for herself, no doubt, 
great loss for you in treasure. We'll not go back 
to our old estates or leave for other parts, 
not till she weds the Argive man she fancies." 

But with calm good sense Telemachus replied: 
"Antinous, how can 1 drive my mother from our house 
against her will, the one who bore me, reared me too? 
My father is worlds away, dead or alive, who knows? 
Imagine the high price I'd have to pay Icarius 
if all on my own 1 send my mother home. 
Oh what 1 would suffer from her father — 
and some dark god would hurt me even more 
when mother, leaving her own house behind, 
calls down her withering Furies on my head, 
and our people's cries of shame would hound my heels. 
1 will never issue that ultimatum to my mother. 
And you, if you have any shame in your own hearts, 
you must leave my palace! See to your feasting elsewhere, 
devour your own possessions, house to house by turns. 
But if you decide the fare is better, richer here, 
destroying one man's goods and going scot-free, 
all right then, carve away! 



But I'll cry out to the everlasting gods in hopes 

that Zeus will pay you back with a vengeance — all of you 

destroyed in my house while /go scot-free myself!" 

And to seal his prayer, farseeing Zeus sent down a sign. 
He launched two eagles soaring high from a mountain ridge 
and down they glided, borne on the wind's draft a moment, 
wing to wingtip, pinions straining taut till just 
above the assembly's throbbing hum they whirled, 
suddenly, wings thrashing, wild onslaught of wings 
and banking down at the crowd's heads — a glaring, fatal sign — 
talons slashing each other, tearing cheeks and throats 
they swooped away on the right through homes and city. 
All were dumbstruck, watching the eagles trail from sight, 
people brooding, deeply, what might come to pass ... 
Until the old warrior Halitherses, 
Master's son, broke the silence for them: 
the one who outperformed all men of his time 
at reading bird-signs, sounding out the omens, 
rose and spoke, distraught for each man there: 
"Hear me, men of Ithaca! Hear what 1 have to say, 
though my revelations strike the suitors first of all — 
a great disaster is rolling like a breaker toward their heads. 
Clearly Odysseus won't be far from loved ones any longer — 
now, right now, he's somewhere near, 1 tell you, 
breeding bloody death for all these suitors here, 
pains aplenty too for the rest of us who live 
in Ithaca's sunlit air. 

Long before that, 
we must put heads together, find some way 
to stop these men, or let them stop themselves. 
Better for them that way, by far. 1 myself 
am no stranger to prophecy — 1 can see it now! 
Odysseus ... all is working out for him, 1 say, 
just as 1 said it would that day the Argives sailed 
for Troy and the mastermind of battle boarded with them. 
1 said then: after many blows, and all his shipmates lost, 
after twenty years had wheeled by, he would come home. 



unrecognized by all ... 

and now, look, it all comes to pass!" 

"Stop, old man!" 
Eurymachus, Polybus' son, rose up to take him on. 
"Go home and babble your omens to your children — 
save tJiem from some catastrophe coming soon. 
I'm a better hand than you at reading portents. 
Flocks of birds go fluttering under the sun's rays, 
not all are fraught with meaning. Odysseus? 
He's dead now, far from home — 
would to god that you'd died with him too. 
We'd have escaped your droning prophecies then 
and the way you've loosed the dogs of this boy's anger — 
your eyes peeled for a house-gift he might give you. 
Here's /72f/ prophecy, bound to come to pass. 
If you, you old codger, wise as the ages, 
talk him round, incite the boy to riot, 
he'll be the first to suffer, let me tell you. 
And you, old man, we'll clap some fine on you 
you'll weep to pay, a fine to crush your spirit! 

Telemachus? 
Here in front of you all, here's my advice for Ajm. 
Let him urge his mother back to her father's house — 
her kin will arrange the wedding, provide the gifts, 
the array that goes with a daughter dearly loved. 
Not till then, I'd say, will the island princes quit 
their taxing courtship. Who's there to fear? 1 ask you. 
Surely not Telemachus, with all his tiresome threats. 
Nor do we balk, old man, at the prophecies you mouth — 
they'll come to grief, they'll make us hate you more. 
The prince's wealth will be devoured as always, 
mercilessly — no reparations, ever ... not 
while the queen drags out our hopes to wed her, 
waiting, day after day, all of us striving hard 
to win one matchless beauty. Never courting others, 
bevies of brides who'd suit each noble here." 



Telemachus answered, firm in his resolve: 
"Eurymachus — the rest of you fine, brazen suitors — 
I have done with appeals to you about these matters. 
I'll say no more. The gods know how things stand 
and so do all the Achaeans. And now all 1 ask 
is a good swift ship and a crew of twenty men 
to speed me through my passage out and back. 
I'm sailing off to Sparta, sandy Pylos too, 
for news of my long-lost father's journey home. 
Someone may tell me something 
or 1 may catch a rumor straight from Zeus, 
rumor that carries news to men like nothing else. 
Now, if 1 hear my father's alive and heading home, 
hard-pressed as 1 am, I'll brave out one more year. 
If 1 hear he's dead, no longer among the living, 
then back I'll come to the native land 1 love, 
raise his grave-mound, build his honors high 
with the full funeral rites that he deserves — 
and give my mother to another husband." 

A declaration, 
and the prince sat down as Mentor took the floor, 
Odysseus' friend-in-arms to whom the king, 
sailing off to Troy, committed his household, 
ordering one and all to obey the old man 
and he would keep things steadfast and secure. 
With deep concern for the realm, he rose and warned, 
"Hear me, men of Ithaca. Hear what 1 have to say. 
Never let any sceptered king be kind and gentle now, 
not with all his heart, or set his mind on justice — 
no, let him be cruel and always practice outrage. 
Think: not one of the people whom he ruled 
remembers Odysseus now, that godlike man, 
and kindly as a father to his children! 
1 don't grudge these arrogant suitors for a moment, 
weaving their violent work with all their wicked hearts — 
they lay their lives on the line when they consume 
Odysseus' worldly goods, blind in their violence, 
telling themselves that he'll come home no more. 
But all the rest of you, how you rouse my fury! 



Sitting here in silence ... 

never a word put forth to curb these suitors, 

paltry few as they are and you so many." 

"Mentor!" 

Euenor 's son Leocritus rounded on him, shouting, 

"Rabble-rousing fool, now what's this talk? 

Goading them on to try and hold us back! 

It's uphill work, 1 warn you, 

fighting a force like ours — for just a meal. 

Even if Odysseus of Ithaca did arrive in person, 

to find us well-bred suitors feasting in his halls, 

and the man were hell-bent on routing us from the palace — 

little joy would his wife derive from his return, 

for all her yearning. Here on the spot he'd meet 

a humiliating end if he fought against such odds. 

You're talking nonsense — idiocy. 

No more. Come, 
dissolve the assembly. Each man return to his holdings. 
Mentor and Halitherses can speed our young prince on, 
his father's doddering friends since time began. 
He'll sit tight a good long while, 1 trust, 
scrabbling for news right here in Ithaca — 
he'll never make that trip." 

This broke up the assembly, keen to leave. 
The people scattered quickly, each to his own house, 
while the suitors strolled back to King Odysseus' palace. 

Telemachus, walking the beach now, far from others, 
washed his hands in the foaming surf and prayed to Pallas: 
"Dear god, hear me! Yesterday you came to my house, 
you told me to ship out on the misty sea and learn 
if father, gone so long, is ever coming home ... 
Look how my countrymen — the suitors most of all, 
the pernicious bullies — foil each move 1 make." 

Athena came to his prayer from close at hand, 
for all the world with Mentor's build and voice. 



and she urged him on with winging words: "Telemachus, 

you'll lack neither courage nor sense from this day on, 

not if your father's spirit courses through your veins — 

now there was a man, I'd say, in words and action both! 

So how can your journey end in shipwreck or defeat? 

Only if you were not his stock, Penelope's too, 

then I'd fear your hopes might come to grief. 

Few sons are the equals of their fathers; 

most fall short, all too few surpass them. 

But you, brave and adept from this day on — 

Odysseus' cunning has hardly given out in you — 

there's every hope that you will reach your goal. 

Put them out of your mind, these suitors' schemes and plots. 

They 're madmen. Not a shred of sense or decency in the crowd. 

Nor can they glimpse the death and black doom hovering 

just at their heads to crush them all in one short day. 

But you, the journey that stirs you now is not far off, 

not with the likes of me, your father's friend and yours, 

to rig you a swift ship and be your shipmate too. 

Now home you go and mix with the suitors there. 

But get your rations ready, 

pack them all in vessels, the wine in jars, 

and barley -meal — ^the marrow of men's bones — 

in durable skins, while 1 make rounds in town 

and quickly enlist your crew of volunteers. 

Lots of ships in seagirt Ithaca, old and new. 

I'll look them over, choose the best in sight, 

we'll fit her out and launch her into the sea at once!" 

And so Athena, daughter of Zeus, assured him. 
No lingering now — he heard the goddess' voice — 
but back he went to his house with aching heart 
and there at the palace found the brazen suitors 
skinning goats in the courtyard, singeing pigs for roasting. 
Antinous, smiling warmly, sauntered up to the prince, 
grasped his hand and coaxed him, savoring his name: 
"Telemachus, my high and mighty, fierce young friend, 
no more nursing those violent words and actions now. 



Come, eat and drink with us, just like the old days. 
Whatever you want our people will provide. A ship 
and a picked crew to speed you to holy Pylos, 
out for the news about your noble father." 

But self-possessed Telemachus drew the line: 
"Antinous, now how could 1 dine with you in peace 
and take my pleasure? You ruffians carousing here! 
Isn't it quite enough that you, my mother's suitors, 
have ravaged it all, my very best, these many years, 
while 1 was still a boy? But now that I'm full-grown 
and can hear the truth from others, absorb it too — 
now, yes, that the anger seethes inside me ... 
I'll stop at nothing to hurl destruction at your heads, 
whether 1 go to Pylos or sit tight here at home. 
But the trip 1 speak of will not end in failure. 
Go 1 will, as a passenger, nothing more, 
since 1 don't seem to command my own crew. 
That, I'm sure, is the way that suits you best. " 

With this 

he nonchalantly drew his hand from Antinous' hand 
while the suitors, busy feasting in the halls, 
mocked and taunted him, flinging insults now. 
"God help us," one young buck kept shouting, 
"he wants to slaughter us all! 
He's off to sandy Pylos to hire cutthroats, 
even Sparta perhaps, so hot to have our heads. 
Why, he'd rove as far as Ephyra's dark rich soil 
and run back home with lethal poison, slip it 
into the bowl and wipe us out with drink!" 

"Who knows?" another young blade up and ventured. 
"Off in that hollow ship of his, he just might drown, 
far from his friends, a drifter like his father. 
What a bore! He'd double our work for us, 
splitting up his goods, parceling out his house 
to his mother and the man who weds the queen." 

So they scoffed 



but Telemachus headed down to his father's storeroom, 
broad and vaulted, piled high with gold and bronze, 
chests packed with clothing, vats of redolent oil. 
And there, standing in close ranks against the wall, 
were jars of seasoned, mellow wine, holding the drink 
unmixed inside them, fit for a god, waiting the day 
Odysseus, worn by hardships, might come home again. 
Doors, snugly fitted, doubly hung, were bolted shut 
and a housekeeper was in charge by night and day — 
her care, her vigilance, guarding all those treasures — 
Eurycleia the daughter of Ops, Pisenor's son. 
Telemachus called her into the storeroom: "Come, nurse, 
draw me off some wine in smaller traveling jars, 
mellow, the finest vintage you've been keeping, 
next to what you reserve for our unlucky king — 
in case Odysseus might drop in from the blue 
and cheat the deadly spirits, make it home. 
Fill me an even dozen, seal them tightly. 
Pour me barley in well-stitched leather bags, 
twenty measures of meal, your stone-ground best. 
But no one else must know. These rations now, 
put them all together. I'll pick them up myself, 
toward evening, just about the time that mother 
climbs to her room and thinks of turning in. 
I'm sailing off to Sparta, sandy Pylos too, 
for news of my dear father's journey home. 
Perhaps I'll catch some rumor." 

A wail of grief — 
and his fond old nurse burst out in protest, sobbing: 
"Why, dear child, what craziness got into your head? 
Why bent on rambling over the face of the earth? — 
a darling only son! Your father's worlds away, 
god's own Odysseus, dead in some strange land. 
And these brutes here, just wait, the moment you're gone 
they'll all be scheming against you. Kill you by guile, 
they will, and carve your birthright up in pieces. 
No, sit tight here, guard your own things here. 
Don't go roving over the barren salt sea — 



no need to suffer so!" 

"Courage, old woman, " 
thoughtful Telemachus tried to reassure her, 
"there's a god who made this plan. 
But swear you won't say anything to my mother. 
Not till ten or a dozen days have passed 
or she misses me herself and learns I'm gone. 
She mustn't mar her lovely face with tears." 

The old one swore a solemn oath to the gods 
and vowing she would never breathe a word, 
quickly drew off wine in two-eared jars 
and poured barley in well-stitched leather bags. 
Telemachus returned to the hall and joined the suitors. 

Then bright-eyed Pallas thought of one more step. 
Disguised as the prince, the goddess roamed through town, 
pausing beside each likely crewman, giving orders: 
"Gather beside our ship at nightfall — be there." 
She asked Noemon, Phronius' generous son, 
to lend her a swift ship. He gladly volunteered. 

The sun sank and the roads of the world grew dark. 
Now the goddess hauled the swift ship down to the water, 
stowed in her all the tackle well-rigged vessels carry, 
moored her well away at the harbor's very mouth 
and once the crew had gathered, rallying round, 
she heartened every man. 

Then bright-eyed Pallas thought of one last thing. 
Back she went to King Odysseus' halls and there 
she showered sweet oblivion over the suitors, 
dazing them as they drank, knocking cups from hands. 
No more loitering now, their eyes weighed down with sleep, 
they rose and groped through town to find their beds. 
But calling the prince outside his timbered halls, 
taking the build and voice of Mentor once again, 
flashing-eyed Athena urged him on: "Telemachus, 



your comrades-at-arms are ready at the oars, 
waiting for your command to launch. So come, 
on with our voyage now, we're wasting time." 

And Pallas Athena sped away in the lead 
as he followed in her footsteps, man and goddess. 
Once they reached the ship at the water 's edge 
they found their long-haired shipmates on the beach. 
The prince, inspired, gave his first commands: 
"Come, friends, get the rations aboard! 
They 're piled in the palace now. 
My mother knows nothing of this. No servants either. 
Only one has heard our plan. " 

He led them back 
and the men fell in and fetched down all the stores 
and stowed them briskly, deep in the well-ribbed holds 
as Odysseus' son directed. Telemachus climbed aboard. 
Athena led the way, assuming the pilot's seat 
reserved astern, and he sat close beside her. 
Cables cast off, the crew swung to the oarlocks. 
Bright-eyed Athena sent them a stiff following wind 
rippling out of the west, ruffling over the wine-dark sea 
as Telemachus shouted out commands to all his shipmates: 
"All lay hands to tackle!" They sprang to orders, 
hoisting the pinewood mast, they stepped it firm 
in its block amidships, lashed it fast with stays 
and with braided rawhide halyards hauled the white sail high. 
Suddenly wind hit full and the canvas bellied out 
and a dark blue wave, foaming up at the bow, 
sang out loud and strong as the ship made way, 
skimming the whitecaps, cutting toward her goal. 
All running gear secure in the swift black craft, 
they set up bowls and brimmed them high with wine 
and poured libations out to the everlasting gods 
who never die — ^to Athena first of all, 
the daughter of Zeus with flashing sea-gray eyes — 
and the ship went plunging all night long and through the dawn. 



 



King Nestor 
Remembers 



As the sun sprang up, leaving the brilliant waters in its wake, 

climbing the bronze sky to shower light on immortal gods 

and mortal men across the plowlands ripe with grain — 

the ship pulled into Pglos, Neleus' storied citadel, 

where the people lined the beaches, 

sacrificing sleek black bulls to Poseidon, 

god of the sea-blue mane who shakes the earth. 

They sat in nine divisions, each five hundred strong, 

each division offering up nine bulls, and while the people 

tasted the innards, burned the thighbones for the god, 

the craft and crew came heading straight to shore. 

Striking sail, furling it in the balanced ship, 

they moored her well and men swung down on land. 

Telemachus climbed out last, Athena far in front 

and the bright-eyed goddess urged the prince along: 



"Telemachus, no more shyness, this is not the time! 
We sailed the seas for this, for news of your father — 
where does he he buried? what fate did he meet? 
So go right up to Nestor, breaker of horses. 
We'll make him yield the secrets of his heart. 
Press him yourself to tell the whole truth: 
he'll never lie — the man is far too wise." 

The prince replied, wise in his own way too, 
"How can 1 greet him. Mentor, even approach the king? 
I'm hardly adept at subtle conversation. 
Someone my age mightteeX shy, what's more, 
interrogating an older man. " 

"Telemachus," 
the bright-eyed goddess Athena reassured him, 
"some of the words you'll find within yourself, 
the rest some power will inspire you to say. 
You least of all — 1 know — 

were born and reared without the gods' good will." 

And Pallas Athena sped away in the lead 
as he followed in her footsteps — man and goddess 
gained the place where the Pylians met and massed. 
There sat Nestor among his sons as friends around them 
decked the banquet, roasted meats and skewered strips for broiling. 
As soon as they saw the strangers, all came crowding down, 
waving them on in welcome, urging them to sit. 
Nestor's son Pisistratus, first to reach them, 
grasped their hands and sat them down at the feast 
on fleecy throws spread out along the sandbanks, 
flanking his brother Thrasymedes and his father. 
He gave them a share of innards, poured some wine 
in a golden cup and, lifting it warmly toward Athena, 
daughter of Zeus whose shield is storm and thunder, 
greeted the goddess now with an invitation: 
"Say a prayer to lord Poseidon, stranger, 
hisis the feast you've found on your arrival. 
But once you've made your libation and your prayer — 



all according to ancient custom — hand this cup 
of hearty, seasoned wine to your comrade here 
so he can pour forth too. He too, 1 think, 
should pray to the deathless ones himself. 
All men need the gods ... 
but the man is younger, just about my age. 
That's why 1 give the gold cup first to you." 

With that 

Pisistratus placed in her hand the cup of mellow wine 
and Pallas rejoiced at the prince's sense of tact 
in giving the golden winecup first to her. 
At once she prayed intensely to Poseidon: 
"Hear me. Sea-lord, you who embrace the earth — 
don't deny our wishes, bring our prayers to pass! 
First, then, to Nestor and all his sons grant glory. 
Then to all these Pylians, for their splendid rites 
grant a reward that warms their gracious hearts. 
Last, Poseidon, grant Telemachus and myself 
safe passage home, the mission accomplished 
that sped us here in our rapid black ship. " 

So she prayed, and brought it all to pass. 
She offered the rich two-handled cup to Telemachus, 
Odysseus' son, who echoed back her prayer word for word. 
They roasted the prime cuts, pulled them off the spits 
and sharing out the portions, fell to the royal feast. 
Once they'd put aside desire for food and drink, 
old Nestor the noble charioteer began, at last: 
"Now's the time, now they've enjoyed their meal, 
to probe our guests and find out who they are. 
Strangers — friends, who are you? 
Where did you sail from, over the running sea-lanes? 
Out on a trading spree or roving the waves like pirates, 
sea-wolves raiding at will, who risk their lives 
to plunder other men?" 

Poised Telemachus answered, 
filled with heart, the heart Athena herself inspired, 
to ask for the news about his father, gone so long. 



and make his name throughout the mortal world. 

"Nestor, son of Neleus, Achaea's pride and glory — 

where are we from, you ask? 1 will tell you all. 

We hail from Ithaca, under the heights of Nion. 

Our mission here is personal, nothing public now. 

1 am on the trail of my father's widespread fame, 

you see, searching the earth to catch some news 

of great-hearted King Odysseus who, they say, 

fought with you to demolish Troy some years ago. 

About all the rest who fought the Trojans there, 

we know where each one died his wretched death, 

but father ... even his death — 

the son of Cronus shrouds it all in mystery. 

No one can say for certain where he died, 

whether he went down on land at enemy hands 

or out on the open sea in Amphitrite's breakers. 

That's why I've come to plead before you now, 

if you can tell me about his cruel death: 

perhaps you saw him die with your own eyes 

or heard the wanderer's end from someone else. 

More than all other men, that man was born for pain. 

Don't soften a thing, from pity, respect for me — 

tell me, clearly, all your eyes have witnessed. 

1 beg you — if ever my father, lord Odysseus, 

pledged you his word and made it good in action 

once on the fields of Troy where you Achaeans suffered, 

remember his story now, tell me the truth." 

Nestor the noble charioteer replied at length: 
"Ah dear boy, since you call back such memories, 
such living hell we endured in distant Troy — 
we headstrong fighting forces of Achaea — 
so many raids from shipboard down the foggy sea, 
cruising for plunder, wherever Achilles led the way; 
so many battles round King Priam's walls we fought, 
so many gone, our best and bravest fell. 
There Ajax lies, the great man of war. 



There lies Achilles too. 

There Patroclus, skilled as the gods in counsel. 

And there my own dear son, both strong and staunch, 

Antilochus — lightning on his feet and every inch a fighter! 

But so many other things we suffered, past that count — 

what mortal in this wide world could tell it all? 

Not if you sat and probed his memory, five, six years, 

delving for all the pains our brave Achaeans bore there. 

Your patience would fray, you'd soon head for home ... 

Nine years we wove a web of disaster for those Trojans, 
pressing them hard with every tactic known to man, 
and only after we slaved did Zeus award us victory. 
And no one there could hope to rival Odysseus, 
not for sheer cunning — 
at every twist of strategy he excelled us all. 
Your father, yes, if you are in fact his son ... 
1 look at you and a sense of wonder takes me. 
Your way with words — it's just like his — I'd swear 
no youngster could ever speak like you, so apt, so telling. 
As long as 1 and great Odysseus soldiered there, 
never once did we speak out at odds, 
neither in open muster nor in royal council: 
forever one in mind, in judgment balanced, shrewd, 
we mapped our armies' plans so things might turn out best. 
But then, once we'd sacked King Priam's craggy city, 
Zeus contrived in his heart a fatal homeward run 
for all the Achaeans who were fools, at least, 
dishonest too, so many met a disastrous end, 
thanks to the lethal rage 
of the mighty Father's daughter. Eyes afire, 
Athena set them feuding, Atreus' two sons ... 
They summoned all the Achaean ranks to muster, 
rashly , just at sunset — no hour to rally troops — 
and in they straggled, sodden with wine, our heroes. 
The brothers harangued them, told them why they'd met: 
a crisis — Menelaus urging the men to fix their minds 



on the voyage home across the sea's broad back, 
but it brought no joy to Agamemnon, not at all. 

meant to detain us there and offer victims, 
anything to appease Athena's dreadful wrath — 
poor fool, he never dreamed Athena would not comply. 
The minds of the everlasting gods don't change so quickly. 
So the two of them stood there, wrangling, back and forth 
till the armies sprang up, their armor clashing, ungodly uproar — 
two plans split the ranks. That night we barely slept, 
seething with hard feelings against our own comrades, 
for Zeus was brooding over us, poised to seal our doom ... 
At dawn, half of us hauled our vessels down to sea, 
we stowed our plunder, our sashed and lovely women. 
But half the men held back, camped on the beach, 
waiting it out for Agamemnon's next commands 
while our contingent embarked — 
we pushed off and sailed at a fast clip 
as a god smoothed out the huge troughing swells. 
We reached Tenedos quickly, sacrificed to the gods, 
the crews keen for home, but a quick return was not 
in Zeus's plans, not yet: that cruel power 
loosed a cursed feud on us once again. 
Some swung their rolling warships hard about — 
Odysseus sailed them back, the flexible, wily king, 
veering over to Agamemnon now to shore his fortunes up. 
Not 1. Massing the ships that came in my flotilla, 
/sped away as the god's mischief kept on brewing, 
dawning on me now. And Tydeus' fighting son 
Diomedes fled too, rousing all his comrades. 
Late in the day the red-haired Menelaus joined us, 
overtook us at Lesbos, debating the long route home: 
whether to head north, over the top of rocky Chios, 
skirting Psy rie, keeping that island off to port 
or run south of Chios, by Mimas' gusty cape. 
We asked the god for a sign. He showed us one, 
he urged us to cut out on the middle passage, 
straight to Euboea now, 
escape a catastrophe, fast as we could sail! 



A shrilling wind came up, stiff, driving us on 
and on we raced, over the sea-lanes rife with fish 
and we made Geraestus Point in the dead of night. 
Many thighs of bulls we offered Poseidon there — 
thank god we'd crossed that endless reach of sea. 
Then on the fourth day out the crews of Diomedes, 
breaker of horses, moored their balanced ships 
at Argos port, but 1 held course for Pylos, yes, 
and never once did the good strong wind go limp 
from the first day the god unleashed its blast. 

And so, dear boy, 1 made it home from Troy, 
in total ignorance, knowing nothing of their fates, 
the ones who stayed behind: 
who escaped with their lives and who went down. 
But all I've gathered by hearsay, sitting here 
in my own house — that you'll learn, it's only right, 
I'll hide nothing now. 

They say the Myrmidons, 
those savage spearmen led by the shining son 
of lionhearted Achilles, traveled home unharmed. 
Philoctetes the gallant son of Poias, safe as well. 
Idomeneus brought his whole contingent back to Crete, 
all who'd escaped the war — ^the sea snatched none from him. 
But Atreus' son Agamemnon ... you yourselves, even 
in far-off Ithaca, must have heard how he returned, 
how Aegisthus hatched the king's horrendous death. 
But what a price Aepaid, in blood, in suffering. 
Ah how fine it is, when a man is brought down, 
to leave a son behind! Orestes took revenge, 
he killed that cunning, murderous Aegisthus, 
who'd killed his famous father. 

And you, my friend — 
how tall and handsome 1 see you now — be brave, you too, 
so men to come will sing your praises down the years." 

Telemachus, weighing the challenge closely, answered, 
"Oh Nestor, son of Neleus, Achaea's pride and glory. 



what a stroke of revenge that was! All Achaeans 

will spread Orestes' fame across the world, 

a song for those to come. 

If only the gods would arm me in such power 

I'd take revenge on the lawless, brazen suitors 

riding roughshod over me, plotting reckless outrage. 

But for meihe gods have spun out no such joy , 

for my father or myself. 1 must bear up, 

that's all." 

And the old charioteer replied, 
"Now that you mention it, dear boy, 1 do recall 
a mob of suitors, they say, besets your mother 
there in your own house, against your will, 
and plots your ruin. Tell me, though, do you 
/e/^yourself be so abused, or do people round about, 
stirred up by the prompting of some god, despise you now? 
Who knows if he^Ni\\ return someday to take revenge 
on all their violence? Single-handed perhaps 
or with an Argive army at his back? If only 
the bright-eyed goddess chose to love you just 
as she lavished care on brave Odysseus, years ago 
in the land of Troy, where we Achaeans struggled! 
I've never seen the immortals show so much affection 
as Pallas openly showed AJm, standing by your father — 
if only she'd favor you, tend youyNith all her heart, 
many a suitor then would lose all thought of marriage, 
blotted out forever." 

"Never, your majesty," 
Telemachus countered gravely, "that will never 
come to pass, 1 know. What you say dumbfounds me, 
staggers imagination! Hope, hope as 1 will, 
that day will never dawn ... 
not even if the gods should will it so." 

"Telemachus!" 
Pallas Athena broke in sharply, her eyes afire — 
"What's this nonsense slipping through your teeth? 
It's light work for a willing god to save a mortal 



even half the world away. Myself, I'd rather 
sail through years of trouble and labor home 
and see that blessed day, than hurry home 
to die at my own hearth like Agamemnon, 
killed by Aegisthus' cunning — by his own wife. 
But the great leveler. Death: not even the gods 
can defend a man, not even one they love, that day 
when fate takes hold and lays him out at last." 

"Mentor," 

wise Telemachus said, "distraught as we are for him, 
let's speak of this no more. My father's return? 
It's inconceivable now. Long ago the undying gods 
have sealed his death, his black doom. But now 
there's another question 1 would put to Nestor: 
Nestor excels all men for sense and justice, 
his knowledge of the world. 
Three generations he has ruled, they say, 
and to my young eyes he seems a deathless god! 
Nestor, son of Neleus, tell me the whole story — 
how did the great king Agamemnon meet his death? 
Where was Menelaus? What fatal trap did he set, 
that treacherous Aegisthus, to bring down a man 
far stronger than himself? Was Menelaus gone 
from Achaean Argos, roving the world somewhere, 
so the coward found the nerve to kill the king?" 

And old Nestor the noble charioteer replied: 
"Gladly, my boy, I'll tell you the story first to last ... 
Right you are, you guess what would have happened 
if red-haired Menelaus, arriving back from Troy, 
had found Aegisthus alive in Agamemnon's palace. 
No barrow piled high on the earth for JiJs dead body, 
no, the dogs and birds would have feasted on his corpse, 
sprawled on the plain outside the city gates, and no one, 
no woman in all Achaea, would have wept a moment, 
such a monstrous crime the man contrived! 
But there we were, camped at Troy, battling out 



the long hard campaign while he at his ease at home, 
in the depths of Argos, stallion-country — he lay siege 
to the wife of Agamemnon, luring, enticing her with talk. 
At first, true, she spurned the idea of such an outrage, 
Cly temnestra the queen, her will was faithful still. 
And there was a man, what's more, a bard close by, 
to whom Agamemnon, setting sail for Troy, 
gave strict commands to guard his wife. But then, 
that day the doom of the gods had bound her to surrender, 
Aegisthus shipped the bard away to a desert island, 
marooned him there, sweet prize for the birds of prey, 
and swept her off to his own house, lover lusting for lover. 
And many thighbones he burned on the gods' holy altars, 
many gifts he hung on the temple walls — gold, brocades — 
in thanks for a conquest past his maddest hopes. 

Now we, 

you see, were sailing home from Troy in the same squadron, 

Menelaus and 1, comrades-in-arms from years of war. 

But as we rounded holy Sounion, Athens' headland, 

lord Apollo attacked Atrides' helmsman, aye, 

with his gentle shafts he shot the man to death — 

an iron grip on the tiller, the craft scudding fast — 

Phrontis, Onetor's son, who excelled all men alive 

at steering ships when gales bore down in fury. 

So Menelaus, straining to sail on, was held back 

till he could bury his mate with fitting rites. 

But once he'd got off too, plowing the wine-dark sea 

in his ribbed ships, and made a run to Malea's beetling cape, 

farseeing Zeus decided to give the man rough sailing, 

poured a hurricane down upon him, shrilling winds, 

giant, rearing whitecaps, monstrous, mountains high. 

There at a stroke he cut the fleet in half and drove 

one wing to Crete, where Cydonians make their homes 

along the lardanus River. Now, there's a sheer cliff 

plunging steep to the surf at the farthest edge of Gorty n, 

out on the mist-bound sea, where the South Wind piles breakers, 

huge ones, left of the headland's horn, toward Phaestos, 



with only a low reef to block the crushing tides. 
In they sailed, and barely escaped their death — 
the ships' crews, that is — 
the rollers smashed their hulls against the rocks. 
But as for the other five with pitch-black prows, 
the wind and current swept them on toward Egypt. 

So Menelaus, amassing a hoard of stores and gold, 
was off cruising his ships to foreign ports of call 
while Aegisthus hatched his vicious work at home. 
Seven years he lorded over Mycenae rich in gold, 
once he'd killed Agamemnon — he ground the people down. 
But the eighth year ushered in his ruin. Prince Orestes 
home from Athens, yes, he cut him down, that cunning, 
murderous Aegisthus, who'd killed his famous father. 
Vengeance done, he held a feast for the Argives, 
to bury his hated mother, craven Aegisthus too, 
the very day Menelaus arrived, lord of the war cry , 
freighted with all the wealth his ships could carry. 

So you, 

dear boy, take care. Don't rove from home too long, 

too far, leaving your own holdings unprotected — 

crowds in your palace so brazen 

they'll carve up all your wealth, devour it all, 

and then your journey here will come to nothing. 

Still 1 advise you, urge you to visit Menelaus. 

He's back from abroad at last, from people so removed 

you might abandon hope of ever returning home, 

once the winds had driven you that far off course, 

into a sea so vast not even cranes could wing their way 

in one year's flight — so vast it is, so awesome ... 

So, off you go with your ships and shipmates now. 
Or if you'd rather go by land, there's team and chariot, 
my sons at your service too, and they'll escort you 
to sunny Lacedaemon, home of the red-haired king. 
Press him yourself to tell the whole truth: 



he'll never lie — the man is far too wise." 

So he closed 

as the sun set and darkness swept across the earth 
and the bright-eyed goddess Pallas spoke for all: 
"There was a tale, old soldier, so well told. 
Come, cut out the victims' tongues and mix the wine, 
so once we've poured libations out to the Sea-lord 
and every other god, we'll think of sleep. High time — 
the light's already sunk in the western shadows. 
It's wrong to linger long at the gods' feast; 
we must be on our way." 

Zeus's daughter — 
they all hung closely on every word she said. 
Heralds sprinkled water over their hands for rinsing, 
the young men brimmed the mixing bowls with wine, 
they tipped first drops for the god in every cup, 
then poured full rounds for all. They rose and flung 
the victims' tongues on the fire and poured libations out. 
When they'd poured, and drunk to their hearts' content, 
Athena and Prince Telemachus both started up 
to head for their ship at once. 
But Nestor held them there, objecting strongly: 
"Zeus forbid — and the other deathless gods as well — 
that you resort to your ship and put my house behind 
like a rank pauper's without a stitch of clothing, 
no piles of rugs, no blankets in his place 
for host and guests to slumber soft in comfort. 
Why, I've plenty of fine rugs and blankets here- 
No, by god, the true son of my good friend Odysseus 
won't bed down on a ship's deck, not while I'm alive 
or my sons are left at home to host our guests, 
whoever comes to our palace, newfound friends." 

"Dear old man, 

you're right," Athena exclaimed, her eyes brightening now. 
"Telemachus should oblige you. Much the better way. 
Let him follow you now, sleep in your halls, 
but I'll go back to our trim black ship. 



hearten the crew and give each man his orders. 
I'm the only veteran in their ranks, I tell you. 
All the rest, of an age with brave Telemachus, 
are younger men who sailed with him as friends. 
I'll bed down there by the dark hull tonight, 
at dawn push off for the proud Cauconians. 
Those people owe me a debt long overdue, 
and no mean sum, believe me. 
But you, seeing my friend is now your guest, 
speed him on his way with a chariot and your son 
and give him the finest horses that you have, 
bred for stamina, trained to race the wind." 

With that the bright-eyed goddess winged away 
in an eagle's form and flight. 
Amazement fell on all the Achaeans there. 
The old king, astonished by what he'd seen, 
grasped Telemachus' hand and cried out to the prince, 
"Dear boy — never fear you'll be a coward or defenseless, 
not if at your young age the gods will guard you so. 
Of all who dwell on Olympus, this was none but she, 
Zeus's daughter, the glorious one, his third born, 
who prized your gallant father among the Argives. 
Now, 0 Queen, be gracious! Give us high renown, 
myself, my children, my loyal wife and queen. 
1 will make you a sacrifice, a yearling heifer 
broad in the brow, unbroken, never yoked by men. 
I'll offer it up to you — I'll sheathe its horns in gold." 

So he prayed, and Pallas Athena heard his prayer. 
And Nestor the noble chariot-driver led them on, 
his sons and sons-in-law, back to his regal palace. 
Once they reached the storied halls of the aged king 
they sat on rows of low and high-backed chairs. 
As they arrived the old man mixed them all a bowl, 
stirring the hearty wine, seasoned eleven years 
before a servant broached it, loosed its seal. 



Mulling it in the bowl, old Nestor poured 
a libation out, praying hard to Pallas Athena, 
daughter of Zeus whose shield is storm and thunder. 

Once they had poured their offerings, drunk their fill, 
the Pylians went to rest, each in his own house. 
But the noble chariot-driver let Telemachus, 
King Odysseus' son, sleep at the palace now, 
on a corded bed inside the echoing colonnade, 
with Prince Pisistratus there beside him, 
the young spearman, already captain of armies, 
though the last son still unwed within the halls. 
The king retired to chambers deep in his lofty house 
where the queen his wife arranged and shared their bed. 

When young Dawn with her rose-red fingers shone once more 
old Nestor the noble chariot-driver climbed from bed, 
went out and took his seat on the polished stones, 
a bench glistening white, rubbed with glossy oil, 
placed for the king before his looming doors. 
There Neleus held his sessions years ago, 
a match for the gods in counsel, 
but his fate had long since forced him down to Death. 
Now royal Nestor in turn, Achaea's watch and ward, 
sat there holding the scepter while his sons, 
coming out of their chambers, clustered round him, 
hovering near: Echephron, Stratius, Perseus 
and Aretus, Thrasymedes like a god, and sixth, 
young lord Pisistratus came to join their ranks. 
They escorted Prince Telemachus in to sit beside them. 
Nestor, noble charioteer, began the celebration: 
"Quickly, my children, carry out my wishes now 
so 1 may please the gods, Athena first of all — 
she came to me at Poseidon's flowing feast, 
Athena in all her glory! 
Now someone go to the fields to fetch a heifer, 
lead her here at once — a herdsman drive her in. 
Someone hurry down to Prince Telemachus' black ship. 



bring up all his crewmen, leave just two behind. 
And another tell our goldsmith, skilled Laerces, 
to come and sheathe the heifer's horns in gold. 
The rest stay here together. Tell the maids 
inside the hall to prepare a sumptuous feast — 
bring seats and firewood, bring pure water too." 

They all pitched in to carry out his orders. 
The heifer came from the fields, the crewmen came 
from brave Telemachus' ship, and the smith came in 
with all his gear in hand, the tools of his trade, 
the anvil, hammer and well-wrought tongs he used 
for working gold. And Athena came as well 
to attend her sacred rites. 
The old horseman passed the gold to the smith, 
and twining the foil, he sheathed the heifer's horns 
so the goddess' eyes might dazzle, delighted with the gift. 
Next Stratius and Echephron led the beast by the horns. 
Aretus, coming up from the storeroom, brought them 
lustral water filling a flower-braided bowl, 
in his other hand, the barley in a basket. 
Thrasymedes, staunch in combat, stood ready, 
whetted ax in his grasp to cut the heifer down, 
and Perseus held the basin for the blood. 
Now Nestor the old charioteer began the rite. 
Pouring the lustral water, scattering barley-meal, 
he lifted up his ardent prayers to Pallas Athena, 
launching the sacrifice, flinging onto the fire 
the first tufts of hair from the victim's head. 

Prayers said, the scattering barley strewn, 
suddenly Nestor's son impetuous Thrasymedes 
strode up close and struck — ^the ax chopped 
the neck tendons through — 

and the blow stunned 

the heifer's strength — 

The women shrilled their cry, 
Nestor's daughters, sons' wives and his own loyal wife 



Eurydice, Clymenus' eldest daughter. Then, hoisting up 
the victim's head from the trampled earth, they held her fast 
as the captain of men Pisistratus slashed her throat. 
Dark blood gushed forth, life ebbed from her limbs — 
they quartered her quickly, cut the thighbones out 
and all according to custom wrapped them round in fat, 
a double fold sliced clean and topped with strips of flesh. 
And the old king burned these over dried split wood 
and over the fire poured out glistening wine 
while young men at his side held five-pronged forks. 
Once they 'd burned the bones and tasted the organs, 
they sliced the rest into pieces, spitted them on skewers 
and raising points to the fire, broiled all the meats. 

During the ritual lovely Polycaste, youngest daughter 
of Nestor, Neleus' son, had bathed Telemachus. 
Rinsing him off now, rubbing him down with oil, 
she drew a shirt and handsome cape around him. 
Out of his bath he stepped, glowing like a god, 
strode in and sat by the old commander Nestor. 

They roasted the prime cuts, pulled them off the spits 
and sat down to the feast while ready stewards saw 
to rounds of wine and kept the gold cups flowing. 
When they'd put aside desire for food and drink, 
Nestor the noble chariot-driver issued orders: 
"Hurry, my boys! Bring Telemachus horses, 
a good fuU-maned team — 
hitch them to a chariot — he must be off at once." 

They listened closely, snapped to his commands 
and hitched a rapid team to a chariot's yoke in haste. 
A housekeeper stowed some bread and wine aboard 
and meats too, food fit for the sons of kings. 
Telemachus vaulted onto the splendid chariot — 
right beside him Nestor's son Pisistratus, 
captain of armies, boarded, seized the reins, 
whipped the team to a run and on the horses flew. 



holding nothing back, out into open country, 
leaving the heights of Pylos fading in their trail, 
shaking the yoke across their shoulders all day long. 

The sun sank and the roads of the world grew dark 
as they reached Phera, pulling up to Diodes' halls, 
the son of Ortilochus, son of the Alpheus River. 
He gave them a royal welcome; there they slept the night. 

When young Dawn with her rose-red fingers shone once more 
they yoked their pair again, mounted the blazoned car 
and out through the gates and echoing colonnade 
they whipped the team to a run and on they flew, 
holding nothing back — and the princes reached 
the wheatlands, straining now for journey's end, 
so fast those purebred stallions raced them on 
as the sun sank and the roads of the world grew dark. 



 



The King and Queen 
of Sparta 



At last they gained the ravines of Lacedaemon ringed by hills 

and drove up to the halls of Menelaus in his glory. 

They found the king inside his palace, celebrating 

with throngs of kinsmen a double wedding-feast 

for his son and lovely daughter. The princess 

he was sending on to the son of great Achilles, 

breaker of armies. Years ago Menelaus vowed, 

he nodded assent at Troy and pledged her hand, 

and now the gods were sealing firm the marriage. 

So he was sending her on her way with team and chariot, 

north to the Myrmidons' famous city governed by her groom. 

From Sparta he brought Alector's daughter as the bride 

for his own full-grown son, the hardy Megapenthes, 

born to him by a slave. To Helen the gods had granted 

no more offspring once she had borne her first child. 



the breathtaking Hermione, 

a luminous beauty gold as Aphrodite. 

So now 

they feasted within the grand, high-roofed palace, 

all the kin and clansmen of Menelaus in his glory, 

reveling warmly here as in their midst 

an inspired bard sang out and struck his lyre — 

and through them a pair of tumblers dashed and sprang, 

whirling in leaping handsprings, leading on the dance. 

The travelers, Nestor's shining son and Prince Telemachus, 
had brought themselves and their horses to a standstill 
just outside the court when good lord Eteoneus, 
passing through the gates now, saw them there, 
and the ready aide-in-arms of Menelaus 
took the message through his sovereign's halls 
and stepping close to his master broke the news: 
"Strangers have just arrived, your majesty, Menelaus. 
Two men, but they look like kin of mighty Zeus himself. 
Tell me, should we unhitch their team for them 
or send them to someone free to host them well?" 

The red-haired king took great offense at that: 
"Never a fool before, Eteoneus, son of Boethous, 
now 1 see you're babbling like a child! 
Just think of all the hospitality ivie enjoyed 
at the hands of other men before we made it home, 
and god save us from such hard treks in years to come. 
Quick, unhitch their team. And bring them in, 
strangers, guests, to share our flowing feast." 

Back through the halls he hurried, calling out 
to other brisk attendants to follow quickly. 
They loosed the sweating team from under the yoke, 
tethered them fast by reins inside the horse-stalls, 
tossing feed at their hoofs, white barley mixed with wheat, 
and canted the chariot up against the polished walls, 
shimmering in the sun, then ushered in their guests. 



into that magnificent place. Both struck by the sight, 

they marveled up and down the house of the warlord dear to Zeus — 

a radiance strong as the moon or rising sun came flooding 

through the high-roofed halls of illustrious Menelaus. 

Once they'd feasted their eyes with gazing at it all, 

into the burnished tubs they climbed and bathed. 

When women had washed them, rubbed them down with oil 

and drawn warm fleece and shirts around their shoulders, 

they took up seats of honor next to Atrides Menelaus. 

A maid brought water soon in a graceful golden pitcher 

and over a silver basin tipped it out 

so they might rinse their hands, 

then pulled a gleaming table to their side. 

A staid housekeeper brought on bread to serve them, 

appetizers aplenty too, lavish with her bounty. 

As a carver lifted platters of meat toward them, 

meats of every sort, and set before them golden cups, 

the red-haired king Menelaus greeted both guests warmly. 

"Help yourselves to food, and welcome! Once you've dined 

we'll ask you who you are. But your parents' blood 

is hardly lost in you. You must be born of kings, 

bred by the gods to wield the royal scepter. 

No mean men could sire sons like you." 

With those words 
he passed them a fat rich loin with his own hands, 
the choicest part, that he'd been served himself. 
They reached for the good things that lay outspread 
and when they'd put aside desire for food and drink, 
Telemachus, leaning his head close to Nestor's son, 
spoke low to the prince so no one else could hear: 
"Look, Pisistratus— joy of my heart, my friend — 
the sheen of bronze, the blaze of gold and amber, 
silver, ivory too, through all this echoing mansion! 
Surely Zeus's court on Olympus must be just like this, 
the boundless glory of all this wealth inside! 
My eyes dazzle ... 1 am struck with wonder." 



But the red-haired warlord overheard his guest 
and cut in quickly with winged words for both: 
"No man alive could rival Zeus, dear boys, 
with his everlasting palace and possessions. 
But among men, 1 must say, few if any 
could rival mein riches. Believe me, 
much 1 suffered, many a mile 1 roved to haul 
such treasures home in my ships. Eight years out, 
wandering off as far as Cyprus, Phoenicia, even Egypt, 
1 reached the Ethiopians, Sidonians, Erembians — Libya too, 
where lambs no sooner spring from the womb than they grow horns. 
Three times in the circling year the ewes give birth. 
So no one, neither king nor shepherd could want 
for cheese or mutton, or sweet milk either, 
udders swell for the sucklings round the year. 

But while 1 roamed those lands, amassing a fortune, 
a stranger killed my brother, blind to the danger, duped blind — 
thanks to the cunning of his cursed, murderous queen! 
So 1 rule all this wealth with no great joy . 
You must have heard my story from your fathers, 
whoever they are — ^what hardships 1 endured, 
how 1 lost this handsome palace built for the ages, 
filled to its depths with hoards of gorgeous things. 
Well, would to god I'd stayed right here in my own house 
with a third of all that wealth and they yN ere still alive, 
all who died on the wide plain of Troy those years ago, 
far from the stallion-land of Argos. 

And still, 

much as 1 weep for all my men, grieving sorely, 

time and again, sitting here in the royal halls, 

now indulging myself in tears, now brushing tears away — 

the grief that numbs the spirit gluts us quickly — 

for none of all those comrades, pained as 1 am, 

do 1 grieve as much for one ... 

that man who makes sleep hateful, even food, 

as 1 pore over his memory. No one, no Achaean, 

labored hard as Odysseus labored or achieved so much. 

And how did his struggles end? In suffering for that man; 



for me, in relentless, heartbreaking grief for him, 
lost and gone so long now — dead or alive, who knows? 
How they must mourn him too, Laertes, the old man, 
and self-possessed Penelope. Telemachus as well, 
the boy he left a babe in arms at home." 

Such memories 
stirred in the young prince a deep desire to grieve 
for Odysseus. Tears streamed down his cheeks 
and wet the ground when he heard his father's name, 
both hands clutching his purple robe before his eyes. 
Menelaus recognized him at once but pondered deeply 
whether to let him state his father's name 
or probe him first and prompt him step by step. 

While he debated all this now within himself, 
Helen emerged from her scented, lofty chamber — 
striking as Artemis with her golden shafts — 
and a train of women followed ... 
Adreste drew up her carved reclining-chair, 
Alcippe brought a carpet of soft-piled fleece, 
Phylo carried her silver basket given by Alcandre, 
King Polybus' wife, who made his home in Egyptian Thebes 
where the houses overflow with the greatest troves of treasure. 
The king gave Menelaus a pair of bathing-tubs in silver, 
two tripods, ten bars of gold, and apart from these 
his wife presented Helen her own precious gifts: 
a golden spindle, a basket that ran on casters, 
solid silver polished off with rims of gold. 
Now Phylo her servant rolled it in beside her, 
heaped to the brim with yarn prepared for weaving; 
the spindle swathed in violet wool lay tipped across it. 
Helen leaned back in her chair, a stool beneath her feet, 
and pressed her husband at once for each detail: 
"Do we know, my lord Menelaus, who our visitors 
claim to be, our welcome new arrivals? 
Right or wrong, what can 1 say? My heart tells me 
to come right out and say I've never seen such a likeness, 
neither in man nor woman — I'm amazed at the sight. 



To the life he's Uke the son of great Odysseus, 
surely he's Telemachus! The boy that hero left 
a babe in arms at home when all you Achaeans 
fought at Troy, launching your headlong battles 
just for my sake, shameless whore that 1 was." 

"My dear, my dear," the red-haired king assured her, 
"now that you mention it, 1 see the Ukeness too ... 
Odysseus' feet were like the boy 's, his hands as well, 
his glancing eyes, his head, and the fine shock of hair. 
Yes, and just now, as 1 was talking about Odysseus, 
remembering how he struggled, suffered, all for me, 
a flood of tears came streaming down his face 
and he clutched his purple robe before his eyes." 

"Right you are" — Pisistratus stepped in quickly — 
"son of Atreus, King Menelaus, captain of armies: 
here is the son of that great hero, as you say. 
But the man is modest, he would be ashamed 
to make a show of himself, his first time here, 
and interrupt you. We delight in your voice 
as if some god were speaking! 
The noble horseman Nestor sent me along 
to be his escort. Telemachus yearned to see you, 
so you could give him some advice or urge some action. 
When a father's gone, his son takes much abuse 
in a house where no one comes to his defense. 
So with Telemachus now. His father's gone. 
No men at home will shield him from the worst." 

"Wonderful!" the red-haired king cried out. 
"The son of my dearest friend, here in my own house! 
That man who performed a hundred feats of arms for me. 
And 1 swore that when he came I'd give him a hero's welcome, 
him above all my comrades — if only Olympian Zeus, 
farseeing Zeus, had granted us both safe passage 
home across the sea in our swift trim ships. 
Why, I'd have settled a city in Argos for him. 



built him a palace, shipped him over from Ithaca, 

him and all his wealth, his son, his people too — 

emptied one of the cities nestling round about us, 

one I rule myself. Both fellow-countrymen then, 

how often we'd have mingled side-by-side! 

Nothing could have parted us, 

bound by love for each other, mutual delight ... 

till death's dark cloud came shrouding round us both. 

But god himself, jealous of all this, no doubt, 

robbed that unlucky man, him and him alone, 

of the day of his return. " 

So Menelaus mused 
and stirred in them all a deep desire to grieve. 
Helen of Argos, daughter of Zeus, dissolved in tears, 
Telemachus wept too, and so did Atreus' son Menelaus. 
Nor could Nestor's son Pisistratus stay dry-eyed, 
remembering now his gallant brother Antilochus, 
cut down by Memnon, splendid son of the Morning. 
Thinking of him, the young prince broke out: 
"Old Nestor always spoke of you, son of Atreus, 
as the wisest man of all the men he knew, 
whenever we talked about you there at home, 
questioning back and forth. So now, please, 
if it isn't out of place, indulge me, won't you? 
Myself, 1 take no joy in weeping over supper. 
Morning will soon bring time enough for that. 
Not that I'd grudge a tear 
for any man gone down to meet his fate. 
What other tribute can we pay to wretched men 
than to cut a lock, let tears roll down our cheeks? 
And 1 have a brother of my own among the dead, 
and hardly the poorest soldier in our ranks. 
You probably knew him. 1 never met him, never 
saw him myself. But they say he outdid our best, 
Antilochus — lightning on his feet and every inch a fighter!" 

"Well said, my friend," the red-haired king replied. 
"Not even an older man could speak and do as well. 



Your father's son you are — your words have all his wisdom. 

It 's easy to spot the breed of a man whom Zeus 

has marked for joy in birth and marriage both. 

Take great King Nestor now: 

Zeus has blessed him, all his livelong days, 

growing rich and sleek in his old age at home, 

his sons expert with spears and full of sense. 

Well, so much for the tears that caught us just now; 

let's think again of supper. Come, rinse our hands. 

Tomorrow, at dawn, will offer me and Telemachus 

time to talk and trade our thoughts in full." 

Asphalion quickly rinsed their hands with water, 
another of King Menelaus' ready aides-in arms. 
Again they reached for the good things set before them. 

Then Zeus's daughter Helen thought of something else. 
Into the mixing-bowl from which they drank their wine 
she slipped a drug, heart's-ease, dissolving anger, 
magic to make us all forget our pains ... 
No one who drank it deeply, mulled in wine, 
could let a tear roll down his cheeks that day, 
not even if his mother should die, his father die, 
not even if right before his eyes some enemy brought down 
a brother or darling son with a sharp bronze blade. 
So cunning the drugs that Zeus's daughter plied, 
potent gifts from Polydamna the wife of Thon, 
a woman of Egypt, land where the teeming soil 
bears the richest yield of herbs in all the world: 
many health itself when mixed in the wine, 
and many deadly poison. 
Every man is a healer there, more skilled 
than any other men on earth — Egyptians born 
of the healing god himself. So now Helen, once 
she had drugged the wine and ordered winecups filled, 
resuming the conversation, entertained the group: 
"My royal king Menelaus — ^welcome guests here, 
sons of the great as well! Zeus can present us 



times of joy and times of grief in turn: 

all lies within his power. 

So come, let's sit back in the palace now, 

dine and warm our hearts with the old stories. 

1 will tell something perfect for the occasion. 

Surely 1 can't describe or even list them all, 

the exploits crowding fearless Odysseus' record, 

but what a feat that hero dared and carried off 

in the land of Troy where you Achaeans suffered! 

Scarring his own body with mortifying strokes, 

throwing filthy rags on his back like any slave, 

he slipped into the enemy's city, roamed its streets — 

all disguised, a totally different man, a beggar, 

hardly the figure he cut among Achaea's ships. 

That's how Odysseus infiltrated Troy, 

and no one knew him at all ... 

1 alone, 1 spotted him for the man he was, 

kept questioning him — the crafty one kept dodging. 

But after I'd bathed him, rubbed him down with oil, 

given him clothes to wear and sworn a binding oath 

not to reveal him as Odysseus to the Trojans, not 

till he was back at his swift ships and shelters, 

then at last he revealed to me, step by step, 

the whole Achaean strategy. And once he'd cut 

a troop of Trojans down with his long bronze sword, 

back he went to his comrades, filled with information. 

The rest of the Trojan women shrilled their grief. Not 1: 

my heart leapt up — 

my heart had changed by now — 

1 yearned 

to sail back home again! 1 grieved too late for the madness 
Aphrodite sent me, luring me there, far from my dear land, 
forsaking my own child, my bridal bed, my husband too, 
a man who lacked for neither brains nor beauty." 

And the red-haired Menelaus answered Helen: 
"There was a tale, my lady. So well told. 
Now then, 1 have studied, in my time. 



the plans and minds of great ones by the score. 
And I have traveled over a good part of the world 
but never once have 1 laid eyes on a man like him — 
what a heart that fearless Odysseus had inside him! 
What a piece of work the hero dared and carried off 
in the wooden horse where all our best encamped, 
our champions armed with bloody death for Troy ... 
when along you came, Helen — roused, no doubt, 
by a dark power bent on giving Troy some glory, 
and dashing Prince Deiphobus squired your every step. 
Three times you sauntered round our hollow ambush, 
feeling, stroking its flanks, 

challenging all our fighters, calling each by name — 

yours was the voice of all our long-lost wives! 

And Diomedes and 1, crouched tight in the midst 

with great Odysseus, hearing you singing out, 

were both keen to spring up and sally forth 

or give you a sudden answer from inside, 

but Odysseus damped our ardor, reined us back. 

Then all the rest of the troops kept stock-still, 

all but Anticlus. He was hot to salute you now 

but Odysseus clamped his great hands on the man's mouth 

and shut it, brutally — yes, he saved us all, 

holding on grim-set till Pallas Athena 

lured you off at last." 

But clear-sighted Telemachus ventured, 
"Son of Atreus, King Menelaus, captain of armies, 
so much the worse, for not one bit of that 
saved himivom grisly death ... 
not even a heart of iron could have helped. 
But come, send us off to bed. It's time to rest, 
time to enjoy the sweet relief of sleep." 

And Helen briskly told her serving-women 
to make beds in the porch's shelter, lay down 
some heavy purple throws for the beds themselves, 
and over them spread some blankets, thick woolly robes. 



a warm covering laid on top. Torches in hand, 

they left the hall and made up beds at once. 

The herald led the two guests on and so they slept 

outside the palace under the forecourt's colonnade, 

young Prince Telemachus and Nestor's shining son. 

Menelaus retired to chambers deep in his lofty house 

with Helen the pearl of women loosely gowned beside him. 

When young Dawn with her rose-red fingers shone once more 
the lord of the warcry climbed from bed and dressed, 
over his shoulder he slung his well-honed sword, 
fastened rawhide sandals under his smooth feet, 
stepped from his bedroom, handsome as a god, 
and sat beside Telemachus, asking, kindly, 
"Now, my young prince, tell me what brings you here 
to sunny Lacedaemon, sailing over the sea's broad back. 
A public matter or private? Tell me the truth now." 

And with all the poise he had, Telemachus replied, 
"Son of Atreus, King Menelaus, captain of armies, 
1 came in the hope that you can tell me now 
some news about my father. 

My house is being devoured, my rich farms destroyed, 

my palace crammed with enemies, slaughtering on and on 

my droves of sheep and shambling longhorn cattle. 

Suitors plague my mother — ^the insolent, overweening ... 

That's why I've come to plead before you now, 

if you can tell me about his cruel death: 

perhaps you saw him die with your own eyes 

or heard the wanderer's end from someone else. 

More than all other men, that man was born for pain. 

Don't soften a thing, from pity, respect for me — 

tell me, clearly, all your eyes have witnessed. 

1 beg you — if ever my father, lord Odysseus, 

pledged you his word and made it good in action 

once on the fields of Troy where you Achaeans suffered, 

remember his story now, tell me the truth." 

"How shameful!" 



the red-haired king burst out in anger. "That's the bed 

of a brave man of war they'd like to crawl inside, 

those spineless, craven cowards! 

Weak as the doe that beds down her fawns 

in a mighty lion's den — her newborn sucklings — 

then trails off to the mountain spurs and grassy bends 

to graze her fill, but back the lion comes to his own lair 

and the master deals both fawns a ghastly bloody death, 

just what Odysseus will deal that mob — ghastly death. 

Ah if only — Father Zeus, Athena and lord Apollo — 

that man who years ago in the games at Lesbos 

rose to Philomelides' challenge, wrestled him, 

pinned him down with one tremendous throw 

and the Argives roared with joy ... 

if only ^Aa^ Odysseus sported with those suitors, 

a blood wedding, a quick death would take the lot! 

But about the things you've asked me, so intently, 

I'll skew and sidestep nothing, not deceive you, ever. 

Of all Aftold me — the Old Man of the Sea who never lies — 

I'll hide or hold back nothing, not a single word. 

It was in Egypt, where the gods still marooned me, 
eager as 1 was to voyage home ... I'd failed, 
you see, to render them full, flawless victims, 
and gods are always keen to see their rules obeyed. 
Now, there's an island out in the ocean's heavy surge, 
well off the Egyptian coast — they call it Pharos — 
far as a deep-sea ship can go in one day's sail 
with a whistling wind astern to drive her on. 
There's a snug harbor there, good landing beach 
where crews pull in, draw water up from the dark wells, 
then push their vessels off for passage out. 
But here the gods becalmed me twenty days ... 
not a breath of the breezes ruffling out to sea 
that speed a ship across the ocean's broad back. 
Now our rations would all have been consumed, 
our crews' stamina too, if one of the gods 
had not felt sorry for me, shown me mercy. 



Eidothea, a daughter of Proteus, 

that great power, the Old Man of the Sea. 

My troubles must have moved her to the heart 

when she met me trudging by myself without my men. 

They kept roaming around the beach, day in, day out, 

fishing with twisted hooks, their bellies racked by hunger. 

Well, she came right up to me, filled with questions: 

'Are you a fool, stranger — soft in the head and lazy too? 

Or do you let things slide because you //Areyour pain? 

Here you are, cooped up on an island far too long, 

with no way out of it, none that you can find, 

while all your shipmates' spirit ebbs away.' 

So she prodded and 1 replied at once, 
'Let me tell you, goddess — whoever you are — 
I'm hardly landlocked here of my own free will. 
So 1 must have angered one of the deathless gods 
who rule the skies up there. But you tell me — 
you immortals know it all — which one of you 
blocks my way here, keeps me from my voyage? 
How can 1 cross the swarming sea and reach home at last?' 

And the glistening goddess reassured me warmly, 
'Of course, my friend, I'll answer all your questions. 
Who haunts these parts? Proteus of Egypt does, 
the immortal Old Man of the Sea who never lies, 
who sounds the deep in all its depths, Poseidon's servant. 
He's my father, they say, he gave me life. And he, 
if only you ambush him somehow and pin him down, 
will tell you the way to go, the stages of your voyage, 
how you can cross the swarming sea and reach home at last. 
And he can tell you too, if you want to press him — 
you aredi king, it seems — 

all that's occurred within your palace, good and bad, 
while you've been gone your long and painful way.' 

'Then you are the one' — 1 quickly took her up. 
'Show me the trick to trap this ancient power. 



or he'll see or sense me first and slip away. 
It's hard for a mortal man to force a god.' 

'True, my friend,' the glistening one agreed, 
and again I'll tell you all you need to know. 
When the sun stands striding at high noon, 
then up from the waves he comes — 
the Old Man of the Sea who never lies — 
under a West Wind's gust that shrouds him round 
in shuddering dark swells, and once he's out on land 
he heads for his bed of rest in deep hollow caves 
and around him droves of seals — sleek pups bred 
by his lovely ocean-lady — bed down too 
in a huddle, flopping up from the gray surf, 
giving off the sour reek of the salty ocean depths. 
I'll lead you there myself at the break of day 
and couch you all for attack, side-by-side. 
Choose three men from your crew, choose well, 
the best you've got aboard the good decked hulls. 
Now 1 will tell you all the old wizard's tricks ... 
First he will make his rounds and count the seals 
and once he's checked their number, reviewed them all, 
down in their midst he'll lie, like a shepherd with his flock. 
That's your moment. Soon as you see him bedded down, 
muster your heart and strength and hold him fast, 
wildly as he writhes and fights you to escape. 
He'll try all kinds of escape — ^twist and turn 
into every beast that moves across the earth, 
transforming himself into water, superhuman fire, 
but you hold on for dear life, hug him all the harder! 
And when, at last, he begins to ask you questions — 
back in the shape you saw him sleep at first — 
relax your grip and set the old god free 
and ask him outright, hero, 
which of the gods is up in arms against you? 
How can you cross the swarming sea and reach home at last?' 



So she urged and under the breaking surf she dove 
as I went back to our squadron beached in sand, 
my heart a heaving storm at every step ... 
Once I reached my ship hauled up on shore 
we made our meal and the godsent night came down 
and then we slept at the sea's smooth shelving edge. 
When young Dawn with her rose-red fingers shone once more 
1 set out down the coast of the wide-ranging sea, 
praying hard to the gods for all their help, 
taking with me the three men 1 trusted most 
on every kind of mission. 

Eidothea, now, 
had slipped beneath the sea's engulfing folds 
but back from the waves she came with four sealskins, 
all freshly stripped, to deceive her father blind. 
She scooped out lurking-places deep in the sand 
and sat there waiting as we approached her post, 
then couching us side-by-side she flung a sealskin 
over each man's back. Now there was an ambush 
that would have overpowered us all — overpowering, 
true, the awful reek of all those sea-fed brutes! 
Who'd dream of bedding down with a monster of the deep? 
But the goddess sped to our rescue, found the cure 
with ambrosia, daubing it under each man's nose — 
that lovely scent, it drowned the creatures' stench. 
So all morning we lay there waiting, spirits steeled, 
while seals came crowding, jostling out of the sea 
and flopped down in rows, basking along the surf. 
At high noon the old man emerged from the waves 
and found his fat-fed seals and made his rounds, 
counting them off, counting usthe first four, 
but he had no inkling of all the fraud afoot. 
Then down he lay and slept, but we with a battle-cry, 
we rushed him, flung our arms around him — he'd lost nothing, 
the old rascal, none of his cunning quick techniques! 
First he shifted into a great bearded lion 
and then a serpent — 

a panther — 

a ramping wild boar — 



a torrent of water — 

a tree with soaring branchtops — 
but we held on for dear life, braving it out 
until, at last, that quick-change artist, 
the old wizard, began to weary of all this 
and burst out into rapid-fire questions: 
'Which god, Menelaus, conspired with you 
to trap me in ambush? seize me against my will? 
What on earth do you want?' 

'You know, old man,' 
1 countered now. Why put me off with questions? 
Here 1 am, cooped up on an island far too long, 
with no way out of it, none that 1 can find, 
while my spirit ebbs away. But you tell me — 
you immortals know it all — which one of you 
blocks my way here, keeps me from my voyage? 
How can 1 cross the swarming sea and reach home at last?' 

'How wrong you were!' the seer shot back at once. 
'You should have offered Zeus and the other gods 
a handsome sacrifice, then embarked, if you ever hoped 
for a rapid journey home across the wine-dark sea. 
It's not your destiny yet to see your loved ones, 
reach your own grand house, your native land at last, 
not till you sail back through Egyptian waters — 
the great Nile swelled by the rains of Zeus — 
and make a splendid rite to the deathless gods 
who rule the vaulting skies. Then, only then 
will the gods grant you the voyage you desire.' 

So he urged, and broke the heart inside me, 
having to double back on the mist-bound seas, 
back to Egypt, that, that long and painful way ... 
Nevertheless 1 caught my breath and answered, 
'That 1 will do, old man, as you command. 
But tell me this as well, and leave out nothing: 
Did all the Achaeans reach home in the ships unharmed, 
all we left behind, Nestor and 1, en route from Troy? 



Or did any die some cruel death by shipwreck 

or die in the arms of loved ones, 

once they 'd wound down the long coil of war?' 

And he lost no time in saying, 'Son of Atreus, 
why do you ask me that? Why do you need to know? 
Why probe my mind? You won't stay dry-eyed long, 
1 warn you, once you have heard the whole story. 
Many of them were killed, many survived as well, 
but only two who captained your bronze-armored units 
died on the way home — you know who died in the fighting, 
you were there yourself. 

And one is still alive, 
held captive, somewhere, off in the endless seas ... 

Ajax, now, went down with his long-oared fleet. 
First Poseidon drove him onto the cliffs of Gyrae, 
looming cliffs, then saved him from the breakers — 
he'd have escaped his doom, too, despite Athena's hate, 
if he hadn't flung that brazen boast, the mad blind fool. 
"In the teeth of the gods," he bragged, "1 have escaped 
the ocean's sheer abyss!" Poseidon heard that frantic vaunt 
and the god grasped his trident in both his massive hands 
and struck the Gyraean headland, hacked the rock in two, 
and the giant stump stood fast but the jagged spur 
where Ajax perched at first, the raving madman — 
toppling into the sea, it plunged him down, down 
in the vast, seething depths. And so he died, 
having drunk his fill of brine. 

Your brother? 
He somehow escaped that fate; Agamemnon got away 
in his beaked ships. Queen Hera pulled him through. 
But just as he came abreast of Malea's beetling cape 
a hurricane snatched him up and swept him way off course — 
groaning, desperate — driving him over the fish-infested sea 
to the wild borderland where Thgestes made his home 
in days of old and his son Aegisthus lived now. 
But even from there a safe return seemed likely. 



yes, the immortals swung the wind around to fair 

and the victors sailed home. How rejoiced, 

Atrides setting foot on his fatherland once more — 

he took that native earth in his hands and kissed it, 

hot tears flooding his eyes, so thrilled to see his land! 

But a watchman saw him too — from a lookout high above — 

a spy that cunning Aegisthus stationed there, 

luring the man with two gold bars in payment. 

One whole year he'd watched ... 

so the great king would not get past unseen. 

his fighting power intact for self-defense. 

The spy ran the news to his master 's halls 

and Aegisthus quickly set his stealthy trap. 

Picking the twenty best recruits from town 

he packed them in ambush at one end of the house, 

at the other he ordered a banquet dressed and spread 

and went to welcome the conquering hero, Agamemnon, 

went with team and chariot, and a mind aswarm with evil. 

Up from the shore he led the king, he ushered him in — 

suspecting nothing of all his doom — he feasted him well 

then cut him down as a man cuts down some ox at the trough! 

Not one of your brother's men-at-arms was left alive, 

none of Aegisthus' either. All, killed in the palace.' 

So Proteus said, and his story crushed my heart. 
1 knelt down in the sand and wept. I'd no desire 
to go on living and see the rising light of day. 
But once I'd had my fill of tears and writhing there, 
the Old Man of the Sea who never lies continued, 
'No more now, Menelaus. How long must you weep? 
Withering tears, what good can come of tears? 
None 1 know of. Strive instead to return 
to your native country — hurry home at once! 
Either you'll find the murderer still alive 
or Orestes will have beaten you to the kill. 
You'll be in time to share the funeral feast.' 



So he pressed, and I felt my heart, my old pride, 
for all my grieving, glow once more in my chest 
and 1 asked the seer in a rush of winging words, 
'Those two 1 know now. Tell me the third man's name. 
Who is still alive, held captive off in the endless seas? 
Unless he's dead by now. 1 want to know the truth 
though it grieves me all the more.' 

'Odysseus' — 
the old prophet named the third at once — 
'Laertes' son, who makes his home in Ithaca ... 
1 saw him once on an island, weeping live warm tears 
in the nymph Calypso's house — she holds him there by force. 
He has no way to voyage home to his own native land, 
no trim ships in reach, no crew to ply the oars 
and send him scudding over the sea's broad back. 
But about your destiny, Menelaus, dear to Zeus, 
it's not for you to die 

and meet your fate in the stallion-land of Argos, 
no, the deathless ones will sweep you off to the world's end, 
the Elysian Fields, where gold-haired Rhadamanthys waits, 
where life glides on in immortal ease for mortal man; 
no snow, no winter onslaught, never a downpour there 
but night and day the Ocean River sends up breezes, 
singing winds of the West refreshing all mankind. 
All this because you are Helen's husband now — 
the gods count you the son-in-law of Zeus.' 

So he divined and down the breaking surf he dove 
as 1 went back to the ships with my brave men, 
my heart a rising tide at every step. 
Once 1 reached my craft hauled up on shore 
we made our meal and the godsent night came down 
and then we slept at the sea's smooth shelving edge. 
When young Dawn with her rose-red fingers shone once more 
we hauled the vessels down to the sunlit breakers first 
then stepped the masts amidships, canvas brailed — 
the crews swung aboard, they sat to the oars in ranks 
and in rhythm churned the water white with stroke on stroke. 
Back we went to the Nile swelled by the rains of Zeus, 



I moored the ships and sacrificed in a splendid rite, 
and once I'd slaked the wrath of the everlasting gods 
I raised a mound for Agamemnon, his undying glory. 
All this done, 1 set sail and the gods sent me 
a stiff following wind that sped me home, 
home to the native land 1 love. 

But come, 

my boy, stay on in my palace now with me, 

at least till ten or a dozen days have passed. 

Then I'll give you a princely send-off — shining gifts, 

three stallions and a chariot burnished bright — 

and I'll add a gorgeous cup so you can pour 

libations out to the deathless gods on high 

and remember Menelaus all your days." 

Telemachus, 
summoning up his newfound tact, replied, 
"Please, Menelaus, don't keep me quite so long. 
True, I'd gladly sit beside you one whole year 
without a twinge of longing for home or parents. 
It's wonderful how you tell your stories, all you say — 
1 delight to listen! Yes, but now, I'm afraid, 
my comrades must be restless in sacred Pylos, 
and here you'd hold me just a little longer. 
As for the gift you give me, let it be a keepsake. 
Those horses 1 really cannot take to Ithaca; 
better to leave them here to be your glory. 
You rule a wide level plain 
where the fields of clover roll and galingale 
and wheat and oats and glistening full-grain barley. 
No running-room for mares in Ithaca though, no meadows. 
Goat, not stallion, land, yet it means the world to me. 
None of the rugged islands slanting down to sea 
is good for pasture or good for bridle paths, 
but Ithaca, best of islands, crowns them all!" 

So he declared. The lord of the warcry smiled, 
patted him with his hand and praised his guest, concluding, 
"Good blood runs in you, dear boy, your words are proof. 



Certainly I'll exchange the gifts. The power's mine. 
Of all the treasures lying heaped in my palace 
you shall have the finest, most esteemed. Why, 
I'll give you a mixing-bowl, forged to perfection — 
it's solid silver finished off with a lip of gold. 
Hephaestus made it himself. And a royal friend, 
Phaedimus, king of Sidon, lavished it on me 
when his palace welcomed me on passage home. 
How pleased I'd be if you took it as a gift! " 

And now as the two confided in each other, 
banqueters arrived at the great king's palace, 
leading their own sheep, bearing their hearty wine, 
and their wives in lovely headbands sent along the food. 
And so they bustled about the halls preparing dinner ... 
But all the while the suitors, before Odysseus' palace, 
amused themselves with discus and long throwing spears, 
out on the leveled grounds, free and easy as always, 
full of swagger. But lord Antinous sat apart, 
dashing Eurymachus beside him, ringleaders, 
head and shoulders the strongest of the lot. 
Phronius' son Noemon approached them now, 
quick to press Antinous with a question: 
"Antinous, have we any notion or not 
when Telemachus will return from sandy Pylos? 
He sailed in a ship of mine and now 1 need her back 
to cross over to Elis Plain where 1 keep a dozen horses, 
brood-mares suckling some heavy-duty mules, unbroken. 
I'd like to drive one home and break him in." 

That dumbfounded them both. They never dreamed 
the prince had gone to Pylos, Neleus' city — 
certain the boy was still nearby somewhere, 
out on his farm with flocks or with the swineherd. 

"Tell me the truth!" Antinous wheeled on Noemon. 
"When did he go? And what young crew went with him? 
Ithaca's best? Or his own slaves and servants? 



Surely he has enough to man a ship. 

Tell me this — be clear — I've got to know: 

did he commandeer your ship against your will 

or did you volunteer it once he'd won you over?" 

"1 volunteered it, of course, " Noemon said. 
"What else could anyone do, when such a man, 
a prince weighed down with troubles, 
asked a favor? Hard to deny him anything. 
And the young crew that formed his escort? Well, 
they're the finest men on the island, next to us. 
And Mentor took command — 1 saw him climb aboard — 
or a god who looked like Mentor head to foot, 
and that's what 1 find strange. 1 saw good Mentor 
yesterday, just at sunup, here. But clearly 
he boarded ship for Pylos days ago." 

With that he headed back to his father's house, 
leaving the two lords stiff with indignation. 
They made the suitors sit down in a group 
and stop their games at once. Eupithes' son 
Antinous rose up in their midst to speak, 
his dark heart filled with fury, 
blazing with anger — eyes like searing fire: 
"By god, what a fine piece of work he's carried off! 
Telemachus — ^what insolence — and we thought his little jaunt 
would come to grief. But in spite of us all, look, 
the young cub slips away , just like that— 
picks the best crew in the land and off he sails. 
And this is just the start of the trouble he can make. 
Zeus kill that brazen boy before he hits his prime! 
Quick, fetch me a swift ship and twenty men — 
I'll waylay him from ambush, board him coming back 
in the straits between Ithaca and rocky Same. 
This gallant voyage of his to find his father 
will find wrecked at last!" 



They all roared approval, urged him on, 
rose at once and retired to Odysseus' palace. 

But not for long was Penelope unaware 
of the grim plots her suitors planned in secret. 
The herald Medon told her. He'd overheard their schemes, 
listening in outside the court while they wove on within. 
He rushed the news through the halls to tell the queen 
who greeted him as he crossed her chamber 's threshold: 
"Herald, why have the young blades sent you now? 
To order King Odysseus' serving- women 
to stop their work and slave to fix their feast? 
1 hate their courting, their running riot here — 
would to god that this meal, here and now, 
were their last meal on earth! 

Day after day, 
all of you swarming, draining our life's blood, 
my wary son's estate. What, didn't you listen 
to your fathers — when you were children, years ago — 
telling you how Odysseus treated them, your parents? 
Never an unfair word, never an unfair action 
among his people here, though that's the way 
of our god-appointed kings, 
hating one man, loving the next, with luck. 
Not Odysseus. Never an outrage done to any man alive. 
But you, you and your ugly outbursts, shameful acts, 
they're plain to see. Look at the thanks he gets 
for all past acts of kindness!" 

Medon replied, 
sure of his own discretion, "Ah my queen, 
if only tJiatyNsre the worst of all you face. 
Now your suitors are plotting something worse, 
harsher, cruder. God forbid they bring it off! 
They 're poised to cut Telemachus down with bronze swords 
on his way back home. He's sailed off, you see ... 
for news of his father — ^to sacred Pylos first, 
then out to the sunny hills of Lacedaemon." 



Her knees gave way on the spot, her heart too. 
She stood there speechless a while, struck dumb, 
tears filling her eyes, her warm voice choked. 
At last she found some words to make reply: 
"Oh herald, why has my child gone and left me? 
No need in the world for him to board the ships, 
those chariots of the sea that sweep men on, 
driving across the ocean's endless wastes ... 
Does he want his very name wiped off the earth?" 

Medon, the soul of thoughtfulness, responded, 
"1 don't know if a god inspired your son 
or the boy 's own impulse led him down to Pylos, 
but he went to learn of his father's journey home, 
or whatever fate he's met." 

Back through King Odysseus' house he went 
but a cloud of heartbreak overwhelmed the queen. 
She could bear no longer sitting on a chair 
though her room had chairs aplenty. 
Down she sank on her well-built chamber's floor, 
weeping, pitifully, as the women whimpered round her, 
all the women, young and old, who served her house. 
Penelope, sobbing uncontrollably, cried out to them, 
"Hear me, dear ones! Zeus has given me torment — 
me above all the others born and bred in my da\^. 
My lionhearted husband, lost, long years ago, 
who excelled the Argives all in every strength — 
that great man whose fame resounds through Hellas 
right to the depths of Argos! 

But now my son, 
my darling boy — the whirlwinds have ripped him 
out of the halls without a trace! 1 never heard 
he'd gone — not even from you, you hard, heartless ... 
not one of you even thought to rouse me from my bed, 
though well you knew when he boarded that black ship. 
Oh if only 1 had learned he was planning such a journey , 
he would have stayed, by god, keen as he was to sail — 
or left me dead right here within our palace. 



Go, someone, quickly! Call old Dolius now, 
the servant my father gave me when 1 came, 
the man who tends my orchard green with trees, 
so he can run to Laertes, sit beside him, 
tell him the whole story, blow-by-blow. 
Perhaps — who knows? — he'll weave some plan, 
he'll come out of hiding, plead with all these people 
mad to destroy his line, his son's line of kings! " 

"Oh dear girl, " Eurycleia the fond old nurse replied, 
"kill me then with a bronze knife — no mercy — or let me live, 
here in the palace — I'll hide nothing from you now! 
1 knew it all, 1 gave him all he asked for, 
bread and mellow wine, but he made me take 
a mighty oath that 1, 1 wouldn't tell you, 
no, not till ten or a dozen days had passed 
or you missed the lad yourself and learned he'd gone, 
so tears would never mar your lovely face ... 
Come, bathe now, put some fresh clothes on, 
climb to the upper rooms with all your women 
and pray to Pallas, daughter of storming Zeus — 
5Aemay save Telemachus yet, even at death's door. 
Don't worry an old man, worried enough by now. 
1 can't believe the blessed gods so hate 
the heirs of King Arcesius, through and through. 
One will still live on — 1 know it — born to rule 
this lofty house and the green fields far and wide." 

With that 

she lulled Penelope's grief and dried her eyes of tears. 
And the queen bathed and put fresh clothing on, 
climbed to the upper rooms with all her women 
and sifting barley into a basket, prayed to Pallas, 
"Hear me, daughter of Zeus whose shield is thunder — 
tireless one, Athena! If ever, here in his halls, 
resourceful King Odysseus 

burned rich thighs of sheep or oxen in your honor, 
oh remember it now for my sake, save my darling son, 
defend him from these outrageous, overbearing suitors! " 



She shrilled a high cry and the goddess heard her prayer 
as the suitors burst into uproar through the shadowed halls 
and one of the lusty young men began to brag, "Listen, 
our long-courted queen's preparing us all a marriage — 
with no glimmer at all 

how the murder of her son has been decreed." 

Boasting so, 

with no glimmer at all of what had been decreed. 
But Antinous took the floor and issued orders: 
"Stupid fools! Muzzle your bragging now — 
before someone slips inside and reports us. 
Up now, not a sound, drive home our plan — 
it suits us well, we approved it one and all." 

With that he picked out twenty first-rate men 
and down they went to the swift ship at the sea's edge. 
First they hauled the craft into deeper water, 
stepped the mast amidships, canvas brailed, 
made oars fast in the leather oarlock straps 
while zealous aides-in-arms brought weapons on. 
They moored her well out in the channel, disembarked 
and took their meal on shore, waiting for dusk to fall. 

But there in her upper rooms she lay, Penelope 
lost in thought, fasting, shunning food and drink, 
brooding now ... would her fine son escape his death 
or go down at her overweening suitors' hands? 
Her mind in torment, wheeling 
like some lion at bay, dreading gangs of hunters 
closing their cunning ring around him for the finish. 
Harried so she was, when a deep kind sleep overcame her, 
back she sank and slept, her limbs fell limp and still. 

And again the bright-eyed goddess Pallas thought 
of one more way to help. She made a phantom now, 
its build like a woman's build, Iphthime's, yes, 
another daughter of generous Lord Icarius, 
Eumelus' bride, who made her home in Pherae. 



Athena sped her on to King Odysseus' house 
to spare Penelope, worn with pain and sobbing, 
further spells of grief and storms of tears. 
The phantom entered her bedroom, 
passing quickly in through the doorbolt slit 
and hovering at her head she rose and spoke now: 
"Sleeping, Penelope, your heart so wrung with sorrow? 
No need, 1 tell you, no, the gods who live at ease 
can't bear to let you weep and rack your spirit. 
Your son will still come home — it is decreed. 
He's never wronged the gods in any way." 

And Penelope murmured back, still cautious, 
drifting softly now at the gate of dreams, 
"Why have you come, my sister? 
Your visits all too rare in the past, 
for you make your home so very far away. 
You tell me to lay to rest the grief and tears 
that overwhelm me now, torment me, heart and soul? 
With my lionhearted husband lost long years ago, 
who excelled the Argives all in every strength? 
That great man whose fame resounds through Hellas 
right to the depths of Argos ... 

And now my darling boy, 
he's off and gone in a hollow ship! Just a youngster, 
still untrained for war or stiff debate. Him, 
1 mourn him even more than 1 do my husband — 
quake in terror for all that he might suffer 
either on open sea or shores he goes to visit. 
Hordes of enemies scheme against him now, 
keen to kill him off 

before he can reach his native land again." 

"Courage!" the shadowy phantom reassured her. 
"Don't be overwhelmed by all your direst fears. 
He travels with such an escort, one that others 
would pray to stand beside them. She has power — 



Pallas Athena. She pities you in your tears. 
She wings me here to tell you all these things." 

But the circumspect Penelope replied, 
"If you area, god and have heard a god's own voice, 
come, tell me about that luckless man as well. 
Is he still alive? does he see the light of day? 
Or is he dead already, lost in the House of Death? " 

"About that man, " the shadowy phantom answered, 
"1 cannot tell you the story start to finish, 
whether he's dead or alive. 
It's wrong to lead you on with idle words. " 

At that 

she glided off by the doorpost past the bolt — 

gone on a lifting breeze. Icarius' daughter 

started up from sleep, her spirit warmed now 

that a dream so clear had come to her in darkest night. 

But the suitors boarded now and sailed the sea-lanes, 
plotting in their hearts Telemachus' plunge to death. 
Off in the middle channel lies a rocky island, 
just between Ithaca and Same's rugged cliffs — 
Asteris — not large, but it has a cove, 
a harbor with two mouths where ships can hide. 
Here the Achaeans lurked in ambush for the prince. 



BookV 



Odysseus — Nymph 
and Shipwreck 



As Dawn rose up from bed by her lordly mate Tithonus, 
bringing light to immortal gods and mortal men, 
the gods sat down in council, circling Zeus 
the thunder king whose power rules the world. 
Athena began, recalling Odysseus to their thoughts, 
the goddess deeply moved by the man's long ordeal, 
held captive still in the nymph Calypso's house: 
"Father Zeus — you other happy gods who never die — 
never let any sceptered king be kind and gentle now, 
not with all his heart, or set his mind on justice — 
no, let him be cruel and always practice outrage. 
Think: not one of the people whom he ruled 
remembers Odysseus now, that godlike man, 
and kindly as a father to his children. 



Now 

he's left to pine on an island, racked with grief 

in the nymph Calypso's house — she holds him there by force. 

He has no way to voyage home to his own native land, 

no trim ships in reach, no crew to ply the oars 

and send him scudding over the sea's broad back. 

And now his dear son ... they plot to kill the boy 

on his way back home. Yes, he has sailed off 

for news of his father, to holy Pylos first, 

then out to the sunny hills of Lacedaemon." 

"My child, ' Zeus who marshals the thunderheads replied, 
"what nonsense you let slip through your teeth. Come now, 
wasn't the plan your own? You conceived it yourself: 
Odysseus shall return and pay the traitors back. 
Telemachus? Sail him home with all your skill — 
the power is yours, no doubt — 
home to his native country all unharmed 
while the suitors limp to port, defeated, baffled men." 

With those words, Zeus turned to his own son Hermes. 
"You are our messenger, Hermes, sent on all our missions. 
Announce to the nymph with lovely braids our fixed decree: 
Odysseus journeys home — ^the exile must return. 
But not in the convoy of the gods or mortal men. 
No, on a lashed, makeshift raft and wrung with pains, 
on the twentieth day he will make his landfall, fertile Scheria, 
the land of Phaeacians, close kin to the gods themselves, 
who with all their hearts will prize him like a god 
and send him off in a ship to his own beloved land, 
giving him bronze and hoards of gold and robes — 
more plunder than he could ever have won from Troy 
if Odysseus had returned intact with his fair share. 
So his destiny ordains. He shall see his loved ones, 
reach his high-roofed house, his native land at last." 



So Zeus decreed and the giant-killing guide obeyed at once. 
Quickly under his feet he fastened the supple sandals, 
ever-glowing gold, that wing him over the waves 
and boundless earth with the rush of gusting winds. 
He seized the wand that enchants the eyes of men 
whenever Hermes wants, or wakes us up from sleep. 
That wand in his grip, the powerful giant-killer, 
swooping down from Pieria, down the high clear air, 
plunged to the sea and skimmed the waves like a tern 
that down the deadly gulfs of the barren salt swells 
glides and dives for fish, 
dipping its beating wings in bursts of spray — 
so Hermes skimmed the crests on endless crests. 
But once he gained that island worlds apart, 
up from the deep-blue sea he climbed to dry land 
and strode on till he reached the spacious cave 
where the nymph with lovely braids had made her home, 
and he found her there inside ... 

A great fire 

blazed on the hearth and the smell of cedar 
cleanly split and sweetwood burning bright 
wafted a cloud of fragrance down the island. 
Deep inside she sang, the goddess Calypso, lifting 
her breathtaking voice as she glided back and forth 
before her loom, her golden shuttle weaving. 
Thick, luxuriant woods grew round the cave, 
alders and black poplars, pungent cypress too, 
and there birds roosted, folding their long wings, 
owls and hawks and the spread-beaked ravens of the sea, 
black skimmers who make their living off the waves. 
And round the mouth of the cavern trailed a vine 
laden with clusters, bursting with ripe grapes. 
Four springs in a row, bubbling clear and cold, 
running side-by -side, took channels left and right. 
Soft meadows spreading round were starred with violets, 
lush with beds of parsley. Why, even a deathless god 
who came upon that place would gaze in wonder, 
heart entranced with pleasure. Hermes the guide, 
the mighty giant-killer, stood there, spellbound ... 



But once he'd had his fill of marveling at it all 

he briskly entered the deep vaulted cavern. 

Calypso, lustrous goddess, knew him at once, 

as soon as she saw his features face-to-face. 

Immortals are never strangers to each other, 

no matter how distant one may make her home. 

But as for great Odysseus — 

Hermes could not find him within the cave. 

Off he sat on a headland, weeping there as always, 

wrenching his heart with sobs and groans and anguish, 

gazing out over the barren sea through blinding tears. 

But Calypso, lustrous goddess, questioned Hermes, 

seating him on a glistening, polished chair. 

"God of the golden wand, why have you come? 

A beloved, honored friend, 

but it's been so long, your visits much too rare. 

Tell me what's on your mind. I'm eager to do it, 

whatever I can do ... whatever can be done." 

And the goddess drew a table up beside him, 
heaped with ambrosia, mixed him deep-red nectar. 
Hermes the guide and giant-killer ate and drank. 
Once he had dined and fortified himself with food 
he launched right in, replying to her questions: 
"As one god to another, you ask me why I've come. 
I'll tell you the whole story, mince no words — 
your wish is my command. 
It was Zeus who made me come, no choice of mine. 
Who would willingly roam across a salty waste so vast, 
so endless? Think: no city of men in sight, and not a soul 
to offer the gods a sacrifice and burn the fattest victims. 
But there is no way, you know, for another god to thwart 
the will of storming Zeus and make it come to nothing. 
Zeus claims you keep beside you a most unlucky man, 
most harried of all who fought for Priam's Troy 
nine years, sacking the city in the tenth, 
and then set sail for home. 



But voyaging back they outraged Queen Athena 

who loosed the gales and pounding seas against them. 

There all the rest of his loyal shipmates died 

but the wind drove him on, the current bore him here. 

Now Zeus commands you to send him off with all good speed: 

it is not his fate to die here, far from his own people. 

Destiny still ordains that he shall see his loved ones, 

reach his high-roofed house, his native land at last." 

But lustrous Calypso shuddered at those words 
and burst into a flight of indignation. "Hard-hearted 
you are, you gods! You unrivaled lords of jealousy — 
scandalized when goddesses sleep with mortals, 
openly, even when one has made the man her husband. 
So when Dawn with her rose-red fingers took Orion, 
you gods in your everlasting ease were horrified 
till chaste Artemis throned in gold attacked him, 
out on Delos, shot him to death with gentle shafts. 
And so when Demeter the graceful one with lovely braids 
gave way to her passion and made love with lasion, 
bedding down in a furrow plowed three times — 
Zeus got wind of it soon enough, I'd say, 
and blasted the man to death with flashing bolts. 
So now at last, you gods, you train your spite on me 
for keeping a mortal man beside me. The man 1 saved, 
riding astride his keel-board, all alone, when Zeus 
with one hurl of a white-hot bolt had crushed 
his racing warship down the wine-dark sea. 
There all the rest of his loyal shipmates died 
but the wind drove him on, the current bore him here. 
And /welcomed him warmly, cherished him, even vowed 
to make the man immortal, ageless, all his days ... 
But since there is no way for another god to thwart 
the will of storming Zeus and make it come to nothing, 
let the man go — if the Almighty insists, commands — 
and destroy himself on the barren salt sea! 
I'll send him off, but not with any escort. 
1 have no ships in reach, no crew to ply the oars 
and send him scudding over the sea's broad back. 



But I will gladly advise him — I'll hide nothing — 
so he can reach his native country all unharmed." 

And the guide and giant-killer reinforced her words: 
"Release him at once, just so. Steer clear of the rage of Zeus! 
Or down the years he'll fume and make your life a hell." 

With that the powerful giant-killer sped away. 
The queenly nymph sought out the great Odysseus — 
the commands of Zeus still ringing in her ears — 
and found him there on the headland, sitting, still, 
weeping, his eyes never dry, his sweet life flowing away 
with the tears he wept for his foiled journey home, 
since the nymph no longer pleased. In the nights, true, 
he'd sleep with her in the arching cave — he had no choice — 
unwilling lover alongside lover all too willing ... 
But all his days he'd sit on the rocks and beaches, 
wrenching his heart with sobs and groans and anguish, 
gazing out over the barren sea through blinding tears. 
So coming up to him now, the lustrous goddess ventured, 
"No need, my unlucky one, to grieve here any longer, 
no, don't waste your life away. Now 1 am willing, 
heart and soul, to send you off at last. Come, 
take bronze tools, cut your lengthy timbers, 
make them into a broad-beamed raft 
and top it off with a half-deck high enough 
to sweep you free and clear on the misty seas. 
And 1 myself will stock her with food and water, 
ruddy wine to your taste — all to stave off hunger — 
give you clothing, send you a stiff following wind 
so you can reach your native country all unharmed. 
If only the ffods are willing. They rule the vaulting skies. 
They're stronger than 1 to plan and drive things home." 

Long-enduring Odysseus shuddered at that 
and broke out in a sharp flight of protest. 
"Passage home? Never. Surely you're plotting 
something else, goddess, urging me — in a raft — 



to cross the ocean's mighty gulfs. So vast, so full 

of danger not even deep-sea ships can make it through, 

swift as they are and buoyed up by the winds of Zeus himself. 

1 won't set foot on a raft until you showgood faith, 

until you consent to swear, goddess, a binding oath 

you'll never plot some new intrigue to harm me!" 

He was so intense the lustrous goddess smiled, 
stroked him with her hand, savored his name arid chided, 
"Ah what a wicked man you are, and never at a loss. 
What a thing to imagine, what a thing to say! 
Earth be my witness now, the vaulting Sky above 
and the dark cascading waters of the Styx — 1 swear 
by the greatest, grimmest oath that binds the happy gods; 
1 will never plot some new intrigue to harm you- 
Never. All 1 have in mind and devise for you 
are the very plans I'd fashion for myself 
if 1 were in your straits. My every impulse 
bends to what is right. Not iron, trust me, 
the heart within my breast. 1 am all compassion." 

And lustrous Calypso quickly led the way 
as he followed in the footsteps of the goddess. 
They reached the arching cavern, man and god as one, 
and Odysseus took the seat that Hermes just left, 
while the nymph set out before him every kind 
of food and drink that mortal men will take. 
Calypso sat down face-to-face with the king 
and the women served her nectar and ambrosia. 
They reached out for the good things that lay at hand 
and when they'd had their fill of food and drink 
the lustrous one took up a new approach. "So then, 
royal son of Laertes, Odysseus, man of exploits, 
still eager to leave at once and hurry back 
to your own home, your beloved native land? 
Good luck to you, even so. Farewell! 
But if you only knew, down deep, what pains 
are fated to fill your cup before you reach that shore. 



you'd stay right here, preside in our house with me 
and be immortal. Much as you long to see your wife, 
the one you pine for all your days ... and yet 
1 just might claim to be nothing less than she, 
neither in face nor figure. Hardly right, is it, 
for mortal woman to rival immortal goddess? 
How, in build? in beauty?" 

"Ah great goddess," 
worldly Odysseus answered, "don't be angry with me, 
please. All that you say is true, how well 1 know. 
Look at my wise Penelope. She falls far short of you, 
your beauty, stature. She is mortal after all 
and you, you never age or die ... 
Nevertheless 1 long — 1 pine, all my days — 
to travel home and see the dawn of my return. 
And if a god will wreck me yet again on the wine-dark sea, 
1 can bear that too, with a spirit tempered to endure. 
Much have 1 suffered, labored long and hard by now 
in the waves and wars. Add this to the total — 
bring the trial on!" 

Even as he spoke 
the sun set and the darkness swept the earth. 
And now, withdrawing into the cavern's deep recesses, 
long in each other's arms they lost themselves in love. 

When young Dawn with her rose-red fingers shone once more 
Odysseus quickly dressed himself in cloak and shirt 
while the nymph slipped on a loose, glistening robe, 
filmy, a joy to the eye, and round her waist 
she ran a brocaded golden belt 
and over her head a scarf to shield her brow, 
then turned to plan the great man's voyage home. 
She gave him a heavy bronze ax that fit his grip, 
both blades well-honed, with a fine olive haft 
lashed firm to its head. She gave him a polished 
smoothing-adze as well and then she led the way 
to the island's outer edge where trees grew tall, 
alders, black poplars and firs that shot sky-high. 



seasoned, drying for years, ideal for easy floating. 

Once she'd shown her guest where the tall timber stood, 

Calypso the lustrous goddess headed home again. 

He set to cutting trunks — the work was done in no time. 

Twenty in all he felled, he trimmed them clean with his ax 

and split them deftly, trued them straight to the line. 

Meanwhile the radiant goddess brought him drills — 

he bored through all his planks and wedged them snugly, 

knocking them home together, locked with pegs and bolts. 

Broad in the beam and bottom flat as a merchantman 

when a master shipwright turns out her hull, 

so broad the craft Odysseus made himself. 

Working away at speed 

he put up half -decks pinned to close-set ribs 

and a sweep of gunwales rounded off the sides. 

He fashioned the mast next and sank its yard in deep 

and added a steering-oar to hold her right on course, 

then he fenced her stem to stern with twigs and wicker, 

bulwark against the sea-surge, floored with heaps of brush. 

And lustrous Calypso came again, now with bolts of cloth 

to make the sail, and he finished that off too, expertly. 

Braces, sheets and brails — he rigged all fast on board, 

then eased her down with levers into the sunlit sea. 

That was the fourth day and all his work was done. 
On the fifth, the lovely goddess launched him from her island, 
once she had bathed and decked him out in fragrant clothes. 
And Calypso stowed two skins aboard — dark wine in one, 
the larger one held water — added a sack of rations, 
filled with her choicest meats to build his strength, 
and summoned a wind to bear him onward, fair and warm. 
The wind lifting his spirits high, royal Odysseus 
spread sail — gripping the tiller, seated astern — 
and now the master mariner steered his craft, 
sleep never closing his eyes, forever scanning 
the stars, the Pleiades and the Plowman late to set 
and the Great Bear that mankind also calls the Wagon: 
she wheels on her axis always fixed, watching the Hunter, 



and she alone is denied a plunge in the Ocean's baths. 
Hers were the stars the lustrous goddess told him 
to keep hard to port as he cut across the sea. 
And seventeen days he sailed, making headway well; 
on the eighteenth, shadowy mountains slowly loomed ... 
the Phaeacians' island reaching toward him now, 
over the misty breakers, rising like a shield. 

But now Poseidon, god of the earthquake, saw him — 
just returning home from his Ethiopian friends, 
from miles away on the Solymi mountain-range 
he spied Odysseus sailing down the sea 
and it made his fury boil even more. 
He shook his head and rumbled to himself, 
"Outrageous! Look how the gods have changed their minds 
about Odysseus — while /was off with my Ethiopians. 
Just look at him there, nearing Phaeacia's shores 
where he's fated to escape his noose of pain 
that's held him until now. Still my hopes ride high — 
I'll give that man his swamping fill of trouble!" 

With that he rammed the clouds together — both hands 
clutching his trident — churned the waves into chaos, whipping 
all the gales from every quarter, shrouding over in thunderheads 
the earth and sea at once — and night swept down from the sky — 
East and South Winds clashed and the raging West and North, 
sprung from the heavens, roiled heaving breakers up — 
and Odysseus' knees quaked, his spirit too; 
numb with fear he spoke to his own great heart: 
"Wretched man — ^what becomes of me now, at last? 
1 fear the nymph foretold it all too well — 
on the high seas, she said, before 1 can reach 
my native land I'll fill my cup of pain! And now, 
look, it all comes to pass. What monstrous clouds — 
King Zeus crowning the whole wide heaven black — 
churning the seas in chaos, gales blasting, 
raging around my head from every quarter — 
my death-plunge in a flash, it's certain now! 



Three, four times blessed, my friends-in arms 
who died on the plains of Troy those years ago, 
serving the sons of Atreus to the end. Would to god 
I'd died there too and met my fate that day the Trojans, 
swarms of them, hurled at me^Niih bronze spears, 
fighting over the corpse of proud Achilles! 
A hero's funeral then, my glory spread by comrades — 
now what a wretched death I'm doomed to die!" 

At that a massive wave came crashing down on his head, 
a terrific onslaught spinning his craft round and round — 
he was thrown clear of the decks — 

the steering-oar wrenched 

from his grasp — 

and in one lightning attack the brawling 
galewinds struck full-force, snapping the mast mid-shaft 
and hurling the sail and sailyard far across the sea. 
He went under a good long while, no fast way out, 
no struggling up from under the giant wave's assault, 
his clothing dragged him down — divine Calypso's gifts — 
but at last he fought his way to the surface spewing 
bitter brine, streams of it pouring down his head. 
But half-drowned as he was, he'd not forget his craft — 
he lunged after her through the breakers, laying hold 
and huddling amidships, fled the stroke of death. 
Pell-mell the rollers tossed her along down-current, 
wild as the North Wind tossing thistle along the fields 
at high harvest — dry stalks clutching each other tightly — 
so the galewinds tumbled her down the sea, this way, that way, 
now the South Wind flinging her over to North to sport with, 
now the East Wind giving her up to West to harry on and on. 

But someone saw him — Cadmus' daughter with lovely ankles, 
Ino, a mortal woman once with human voice and called 
Leucothea now she lives in the sea's salt depths, 
esteemed by all the gods as she deserves. 
She pitied Odysseus, tossed, tormented so — 
she broke from the waves like a shearwater on the wing. 



lit on the wreck and asked him kindly, "Ah poor man, 

why is the god of earthquakes so dead set against you? 

Strewing your way with such a crop of troubles! 

But he can't destroy you, not for all his anger. 

Just do as 1 say. You seem no fool to me. 

Strip off those clothes and leave your craft 

for the winds to hurl, and swim for it now, you must, 

strike out with your arms for landfall there, 

Phaeacian land where destined safety waits. 

Here, take this scarf, 

tie it around your waist — it is immortal. 

Nothing to fear now, neither pain nor death. 

But once you grasp the mainland with your hands 

untie it quickly, throw it into the wine-dark sea, 

far from the shore, but you, you turn your head away!" 

With that the goddess handed him the scarf 
and slipped back in the heavy breaking seas 
like a shearwater once again — 
and a dark heaving billow closed above her. 
But battle-weary Odysseus weighed two courses, 
deeply torn, probing his fighting spirit: "Oh no — 
1 fear another immortal weaves a snare to trap me, 
urging me to abandon ship! 1 won't. Not yet. 
That shore's too far away — 
1 glimpsed it myself — ^where sAesays refuge waits. 
No, here's what I'll do, it's what seems best to me. 
As long as the timbers cling and joints stand fast, 
I'll hold out aboard her and take a whipping — 
once the breakers smash my craft to pieces, 
then I'll swim — no better plan for now." 

But just as great Odysseus thrashed things out, 
Poseidon god of the earthquake launched a colossal wave, 
terrible, murderous, arching over him, pounding down on him, 
hard as a windstorm blasting piles of dry parched chaff, 
scattering flying husks — so the long planks of his boat 
were scattered far and wide. But Odysseus leapt aboard 



one timber and riding it like a plunging racehorse 

stripped away his clothes, divine Calypso's gifts, 

and quickly tying the scarf around his waist 

he dove headfirst in the sea, 

stretched his arms and stroked for life itself. 

But again the mighty god of earthquakes spied him, 

shook his head and grumbled deep in his spirit, "Go, go, 

after all you've suffered — rove your miles of sea — 

till you fall in the arms of people loved by Zeus. 

Even so 1 can hardly think you'll find 

your punishments too light!" 

With that threat 
he lashed his team with their long flowing manes, 
gaining Aegae port where his famous palace stands. 

But Zeus's daughter Athena countered him at once. 
The rest of the winds she stopped right in their tracks, 
commanding them all to hush now, go to sleep. 
All but the boisterous North — she whipped him up 
and the goddess beat the breakers flat before Odysseus, 
dear to Zeus, so he could reach the Phaeacians, 
mingle with men who love their long oars 
and escape his death at last. 

Yes, but now, 
adrift on the heaving swells two nights, two days — 
quite lost — again and again the man foresaw his death. 
Then when Dawn with her lovely locks brought on 
the third day, the wind fell in an instant, 
all glazed to a dead calm, and Odysseus, 
scanning sharply, raised high by a groundswell, 
looked up and saw it — landfall, just ahead. 
Joy ... warm as the joy that children feel 
when they see their father's life dawn again, 
one who's lain on a sickbed racked with torment, 
wasting away, slowly, under some angry power's onslaught — 
then what joy when the gods deliver him from his pains! 
So warm, Odysseus' joy when he saw that shore, those trees, 
as he swam on, anxious to plant his feet on solid ground again. 



But just offshore, as far as a man's shout can carry, 
he caught the boom of a heavy surf on jagged reefs — 
roaring breakers crashing down on an ironbound coast, 
exploding in fury — 

the whole sea shrouded — 

sheets of spray — 
no harbors to hold ships, no roadstead where they'd ride, 
nothing but jutting headlands, riptooth reefs, cliffs. 
Odysseus' knees quaked and the heart inside him sank; 
he spoke to his fighting spirit, desperate: "Worse and worse! 
Now that Zeus has granted a glimpse of land beyond my hopes, 
now I've crossed this waste of water, the end in sight, 
there's no way out of the boiling surf — 1 see no way! 
Rugged reefs offshore, around them breakers roaring, 
above them a smooth rock face, rising steeply, look, 
and the surge too deep inshore, no spot to stand 
on my own two legs and battle free of death. 
If 1 clamber out, some big comber will hoist me, 
dash me against that cliff — my struggles all a waste! 
If 1 keep on swimming down the coast, trying to find 
a seabeach shelving against the waves, a sheltered cove — 
1 dread it — another gale will snatch me up and haul me 
back to the fish-infested sea, retching in despair. 
Or a dark power will loose some monster at me, 
rearing out of the waves — one of the thousands 
Amphitrite's breakers teem with. Well 1 know 
the famous god of earthquakes hates my very name!" 

Just as that fear went churning through his mind 
a tremendous roller swept him toward the rocky coast 
where he'd have been flayed alive, his bones crushed, 
if the bright-eyed goddess Pallas had not inspired him now. 
He lunged for a reef, he seized it with both hands and clung 
for dear life, groaning until the giant wave surged past 
and so he escaped its force, but the breaker's backwash 
charged into him full fury and hurled him out to sea. 
Like pebbles stuck in the suckers of some octopus 
dragged from its lair — so strips of skin torn 



from his clawing hands stuck to the rock face. 

A heavy sea covered him over, then and there 

unlucky Odysseus would have met his death — 

against the will of Fate — 

but the bright-eyed one inspired him yet again. 

Fighting out from the breakers pounding toward the coast, 

out of danger he swam on, scanning the land, trying to find 

a seabeach shelving against the waves, a sheltered cove, 

and stroking hard he came abreast of a river 's mouth, 

running calmly, the perfect spot, he thought ... 

free of rocks, with a windbreak from the gales. 

As the current flowed he felt the river's god and 

prayed to him in spirit: "Hear me, lord, whoever you are, 

I've come to you, the answer to all my prayers — 

rescue me from the sea, the Sea-lord's curse! 

Even immortal gods will show a man respect, 

whatever wanderer seeks their help — like me — 

1 throw myself on your mercy, on your current now — 

1 have suffered greatly. Pity me, lord, 

your suppliant cries for help!" 

So the man prayed 
and the god stemmed his current, held his surge at once 
and smoothing out the swells before Odysseus now, 
drew him safe to shore at the river's mouth. 
His knees buckled, massive arms fell limp, 
the sea had beaten down his striving heart. 
His whole body swollen, brine aplenty gushing 
out of his mouth and nostrils — breathless, speechless, 
there he lay, with only a little strength left in him, 
deathly waves of exhaustion overwhelmed him now ... 
But once he regained his breath and rallied back to life, 
at last he loosed the goddess' scarf from his body, 
dropped it into the river flowing out to sea 
and a swift current bore it far downstream 
and suddenly Ino caught it in her hands. 
Struggling up from the banks, he flung himself 
in the deep reeds, he kissed the good green earth 
and addressed his fighting spirit, desperate still: 



"Man of misery, what next? Is this the end? 

If I wait out a long tense night by the banks, 

I fear the sharp frost and the soaking dew together 

will do me in — I'm bone-weary, about to breathe my last, 

and a cold wind blows from a river on toward morning. 

But what if I climb that slope, go for the dark woods 

and bed down in the thick brush? What if I'm spared 

the chill, fatigue, and a sweet sleep comes my way? 

I fear wild beasts will drag me off as quarry." 

But this was the better course, it struck him now. 
He set out for the woods and not far from the water 
found a grove with a clearing all around and crawled 
beneath two bushy olives sprung from the same root, 
one olive wild, the other well-bred stock. 
No sodden gusty winds could ever pierce them, 
nor could the sun's sharp rays invade their depths, 
nor could a downpour drench them through and through, 
so dense they grew together, tangling side-by-side. 
Odysseus crept beneath them, scraping up at once 
a good wide bed for himself with both hands. 
A fine litter of dead leaves had drifted in, 
enough to cover two men over, even three, 
in the wildest kind of winter known to man. 
Long-enduring great Odysseus, overjoyed at the sight, 
bedded down in the midst and heaped the leaves around him. 
As a man will bury his glowing brand in black ashes, 
off on a lonely farmstead, no neighbors near, 
to keep a spark alive — no need to kindle fire 
from somewhere else — so great Odysseus buried 
himself in leaves and Athena showered sleep 
upon his eyes ... sleep in a swift wave 
delivering him from all his pains and labors, 
blessed sleep that sealed his eyes at last. 



 



The Princess and 
the Stranger 

So there he lay at rest, the storm-tossed great Odysseus, 
borne down by his hard labors first and now deep sleep 
as Athena traveled through the countryside 
and reached the Phaeacians' city. Years ago 
they lived in a land of spacious dancing-circles, 
Hyperia, all too close to the overbearing Cyclops, 
stronger, violent brutes who harried them without end. 
So their godlike king, Nausithous, led the people off 
in a vast migration, settled them in Scheria, 
far from the men who toil on this earth — 
he flung up walls around the city, built the houses, 
raised the gods' temples and shared the land for plowing. 
But his fate had long since forced him down to Death 
and now Alcinous ruled, and the gods made him wise. 



straight to his house the clear-eyed Pallas went, 

full of plans for great Odysseus' journey home. 

She made her way to the gaily painted room 

where a young girl lay asleep ... 

a match for the deathless gods in build and beauty, 

Nausicaa, the daughter of generous King Alcinous. 

Two handmaids fair as the Graces slept beside her, 

flanking the two posts, with the gleaming doors closed. 

But the goddess drifted through like a breath of fresh air, 

rushed to the girl's bed and hovering close she spoke, 

in face and form like the shipman Dymas' daughter, 

a girl the princess' age, and dearest to her heart. 

Disguised, the bright-eyed goddess chided, "Nausicaa, 

how could your mother bear a careless girl like you? 

Look at your fine clothes, lying here neglected — 

with your marriage not far off, 

the day you should be decked in all your glory 

and offer elegant dress to those who form your escort. 

That's how a bride's good name goes out across the world 

and it brings her father and queenly mother joy. Come, 

let's go wash these clothes at the break of day — 

I'll help you, lend a hand, and the work will fly! 

You won't stay unwed long. The noblest men 

in the country court you now, all Phaeacians 

just like you, Phaeacia-born and raised. So come, 

first thing in the morning press your kingly father 

to harness the mules and wagon for you, all to carry 

your sashes, dresses, glossy spreads for your bed. 

It's so much nicer for you to ride than go on foot. 

The washing-pools are just too far from town." 

With that 

the bright-eyed goddess sped away to Olympus, where, 
they say, the gods' eternal mansion stands unmoved, 
never rocked by galewinds, never drenched by rains, 
nor do the drifting snows assail it, no, the clear air 
stretches away without a cloud, and a great radiance 
plays across that world where the blithe gods 



live all their days in bliss. There Athena went, 
once the bright-eyed one had urged the princess on. 

Dawn soon rose on her splendid throne and woke 
Nausicaa finely gowned. Still beguiled by her dream, 
down she went through the house to tell her parents now, 
her beloved father and mother. She found them both inside. 
Her mother sat at the hearth with several waiting- women, 
spinning yarn on a spindle, lustrous sea-blue wool. 
Her father she met as he left to join the lords 
at a council island nobles asked him to attend. 
She stepped up close to him, confiding, "Daddy dear, 
1 wonder, won't you have them harness a wagon for me, 
the tall one with the good smooth wheels ... so 1 
can take our clothes to the river for a washing? 
Lovely things, but lying before me all soiled. 
And you yourself, sitting among the princes, 
debating points at your council, 
you really should be wearing spotless linen. 
Then you have five sons, full-grown in the palace, 
two of them married, but three are lusty bachelors 
always demanding crisp shirts fresh from the wash 
when they go out to dance. Look at my duties — 
that all rests on me. " 

So she coaxed, too shy 
to touch on her hopes for marriage, young warm hopes, 
in her father's presence. But he saw through it all 
and answered quickly, "1 won't deny you the mules, 
my darling girl ... 1 won't deny you anything. 
Off you go, and the men will harness a wagon, 
the tall one with the good smooth wheels, 
fitted out with a cradle on the top." 

With that 

he called to the stablemen and they complied. 
They trundled the wagon out now, rolling smoothly, 
backed the mule-team into the traces, hitched them up, 
while the princess brought her finery from the room 



and piled it into the wagon's polished cradle. 
Her mother packed a hamper — treats of all kinds, 
favorite things to refresh her daughter's spirits — 
poured wine in a skin, and as Nausicaa climbed aboard, 
the queen gave her a golden flask of suppling olive oil 
for her and her maids to smooth on after bathing. 
Then, taking the whip in hand and glistening reins, 
she touched the mules to a start and out they clattered, 
trotting on at a clip, bearing the princess and her clothes 
and not alone: her maids went with her, stepping briskly too. 

Once they reached the banks of the river flowing strong 
where the pools would never fail, with plenty of water 
cool and clear, bubbling up and rushing through 
to scour the darkest stains — they loosed the mules, 
out from under the wagon yoke, and chased them down 
the river's rippling banks to graze on luscious clover. 
Down from the cradle they lifted clothes by the armload, 
plunged them into the dark pools and stamped them down 
in the hollows, one girl racing the next to finish first 
until they'd scoured and rinsed off all the grime, 
then they spread them out in a line along the beach 
where the surf had washed a pebbly scree ashore. 
And once they'd bathed and smoothed their skin with oil, 
they took their picnic, sitting along the river's banks 
and waiting for all the clothes to dry in the hot noon sun. 
Now fed to their hearts' content, the princess and her retinue 
threw their veils to the wind, struck up a game of ball. 
White-armed Nausicaa led their singing, dancing beat ... 
as lithe as Artemis with her arrows striding down 
from a high peak — ^Taygetus' towering ridge or Erymanthus — 
thrilled to race with the wild boar or bounding deer, 
and nymphs of the hills race with her, 
daughters of Zeus whose shield is storm and thunder, 
ranging the hills in sport, and Leto's heart exults 
as head and shoulders over the rest her daughter rises, 
unmistakable — she outshines them all, though all are lovely. 
So Nausicaa shone among her maids, a virgin, still unwed. 



But now, as she was about to fold her clothes 
and yoke the mules and turn for home again, 
now clear-eyed Pallas thought of what came next, 
to make Odysseus wake and see this young beauty 
and she would lead him to the Phaeacians' town. 
The ball— 

the princess suddenly tossed it to a maid 
but it missed the girl, splashed in a deep swirling pool 
and they all shouted out — 

and that woke great Odysseus. 
He sat up with a start, puzzling, his heart pounding: 
"Man of misery, whose land have 1 lit on now? 
What arethey here — violent, savage, lawless? 
or friendly to strangers, god-fearing men? 
Listen: shouting, echoing round me — ^women, girls — 
or the nymphs who haunt the rugged mountaintops 
and the river springs and meadows lush with grass! 
Or am 1 really close to people who speak my language? 
Up with you, see how the land lies, see for yourself now ..." 

Muttering so, great Odysseus crept out of the bushes, 
stripping off with his massive hand a leafy branch 
from the tangled olive growth to shield his body, 
hide his private parts. And out he stalked 
as a mountain lion exultant in his power 
strides through wind and rain and his eyes blaze 
and he charges sheep or oxen or chases wild deer 
but his hunger drives him on to go for flocks, 
even to raid the best-defended homestead. 
So Odysseus moved out ... 
about to mingle with all those lovely girls, 
naked now as he was, for the need drove him on, 
a terrible sight, all crusted, caked with brine — 
they scattered in panic down the jutting beaches. 
Only Alcinous' daughter held fast, for Athena planted 
courage within her heart, dissolved the trembling in her limbs, 
and she firmly stood her ground and faced Odysseus, torn now — 



Should he fling his arms around her knees, the young beauty, 

plead for help, or stand back, plead with a winning word, 

beg her to lead him to the town and lend him clothing? 

This was the better way, he thought. Plead now 

with a subtle, winning word and stand well back, 

don't clasp her knees, the girl might bridle, yes. 

He launched in at once, endearing, sly and suave: 

"Here 1 am at your mercy, princess — 

are you a goddess or a mortal? If one of the gods 

who rule the skies up there, you're Artemis to the life, 

the daughter of mighty Zeus — 1 see her now— just look 

at your build, your bearing, your lithe flowing grace ... 

But if you're one of the mortals living here on earth, 

three times blest are your father, your queenly mother, 

three times over your brothers too. How often their hearts 

must warm with joy to see you striding into the dances — 

such a bloom of beauty. True, but lie is the one 

more blest than all other men alive, that man 

who sways you with gifts and leads you home, his bride! 

1 have never laid eyes on anyone like you, 

neither man nor woman ... 

1 look at you and a sense of wonder takes me. 

Wait, 

once 1 saw the like — in Delos, beside Apollo's altar — 
the young slip of a palm-tree springing into the light. 
There I'd sailed, you see, with a great army in my wake, 
out on the long campaign that doomed my life to hardship. 
That vision! Just as 1 stood there gazing, rapt, for hours ... 
no shaft like that had ever risen up from the earth — 
so now 1 marvel at you, my lady: rapt, enthralled, 
too struck with awe to grasp you by the knees 
though pain has ground me down. 

Only yesterday, 

the twentieth day, did 1 escape the wine-dark sea. 
Till then the waves and the rushing gales had swept me on 
from the island of Ogygia. Now some power has tossed me here, 
doubtless to suffer still more torments on your shores. 



I can't believe they 'll stop. Long before that 
the gods will give me more, still more. 

Compassion — 
princess, please! You, after all that 1 have suffered, 
you are the first I've come to. 1 know no one else, 
none in your city, no one in your land. 
Show me the way to town, give me a rag for cover, 
just some cloth, some wrapper you carried with you here. 
And may the good gods give you all your heart desires: 
husband, and house, and lasting harmony too. 
No finer, greater gift in the world than that ... 
when man and woman possess their home, two minds, 
two hearts that work as one. Despair to their enemies, 
joy to all their friends. Their own best claim to glory. ' 

"Stranger," the white-armed princess answered staunchly, 
"friend, you're hardly a wicked man, and no fool, I'd say — 
it's Olympian Zeus himself who hands our fortunes out, 
to each of us in turn, to the good and bad, 
however Zeus prefers ... 

He gave you pain, it seems. You simply have to bear it. 
But now, seeing you've reached our city and our land, 
you'll never lack for clothing or any other gift, 
the right of worn-out suppliants come our way. 
I'll show you our town, tell you our people's name. 
Phaeacians we are, who hold this city and this land, 
and 1 am the daughter of generous King Alcinous. 
All our people's power stems from him." 

She called out to her girls with lovely braids: 
"Stop, my friends! Why run when you see a man? 
Surely you don't think him an enemy, do you? 
There's no one alive, there never will be one, 
who'd reach Phaeacian soil and lay it waste. 
The immortals love us far too much for that. 
We live too far apart, out in the surging sea, 
off at the world's end — 
no other mortals come to mingle with us. 



But here's an unlucky wanderer strayed our way 

and we must tend him well. Every stranger and beggar 

comes from Zeus, and whatever scrap we give him 

he'll be glad to get. So, quick, my girls, 

give our newfound friend some food and drink 

and bathe the man in the river, 

wherever you find some shelter from the wind." 

At that 

they came to a halt and teased each other on 

and led Odysseus down to a sheltered spot 

where he could find a seat, 

just as great Alcinous' daughter told them. 

They laid out cloak and shirt for him to wear, 

they gave him the golden flask of suppling olive oil 

and pressed him to bathe himself in the river's stream. 

Then thoughtful Odysseus reassured the handmaids, 

"Stand where you are, dear girls, a good way off, 

so 1 can rinse the brine from my shoulders now 

and rub myself with oil ... 

how long it's been since oil touched my skin! 

But 1 won't bathe in front of you. 1 would be embarrassed — 

stark naked before young girls with lovely braids." 

The handmaids scurried off to tell their mistress. 
Great Odysseus bathed in the river, scrubbed his body 
clean of brine that clung to his back and broad shoulders, 
scoured away the brackish scurf that caked his head. 
And then, once he had bathed all over, rubbed in oil 
and donned the clothes the virgin princess gave him, 
Zeus's daughter Athena made him taller to all eyes, 
his build more massive now, and down from his brow 
she ran his curls like thick hyacinth clusters 
full of blooms. As a master craftsman washes 
gold over beaten silver — a man the god of fire 
and Queen Athena trained in every fine technique — 
and finishes off his latest effort, handsome work, 
so she lavished splendor over his head and shoulders now. 
And down to the beach he walked and sat apart. 



glistening in his glory, breathtaking, yes, 

and the princess gazed in wonder ... 

then turned to her maids with lovely braided hair: 

"Listen, my white-armed girls, to what 1 tell you. 

The gods of Olympus can't be all against this man 

who's come to mingle among our noble people. 

At first he seemed appalling, 1 must say — 

now he seems like a god who rules the skies up there! 

Ah, if only a man like tJlat^Nere called my husband, 

lived right here, pleased to stay forever ... 

Enough. 

Give the stranger food and drink, my girls." 

They hung on her words and did her will at once, 
set before Odysseus food and drink, and he ate and drank, 
the great Odysseus, long deprived, so ravenous now — 
it seemed like years since he had tasted food. 

The white-armed princess thought of one last thing. 
Folding the clothes, she packed them into her painted wagon, 
hitched the sharp-hoofed mules, and climbing up herself, 
Nausicaa urged Odysseus, warmly urged her guest, 
"Up with you now, my friend, and off to town we go. 
I'll see you into my wise father's palace where, 
1 promise you, you'll meet all the best Phaeacians. 
Wait, let's do it this way. You seem no fool to me. 
While we're passing along the fields and plowlands, 
you follow the mules and wagon, stepping briskly 
with all my maids. I'll lead the way myself. 
But once we reach our city, ringed by walls 
and strong high towers too, with a fine harbor either side ... 
and the causeway in is narrow; along the road the rolling ships 
are all hauled up, with a slipway cleared for every vessel. 
There's our assembly, round Poseidon's royal precinct, 
built of quarried slabs planted deep in the earth. 
Here the sailors tend their black ships' tackle, 
cables and sails, and plane their oarblades down. 
Phaeacians, you see, care nothing for bow or quiver. 



only for masts and oars and good trim ships themselves — 

we glory in our ships, crossing the foaming seas! 

But 1 shrink from all our sea-dogs' nasty gossip. 

Some old salt might mock us behind our backs — 

we have our share of insolent types in town 

and one of the coarser sort, spying us, might say, 

'Now who's that tall, handsome stranger Nausicaa has in tow? 

Where'd she light on himPHer husband-to-be, just wait! 

But who — some shipwrecked stray she's taken up with, 

some alien from abroad? Since nobody lives nearby. 

Unless it's really a god come down from the blue 

to answer all her prayers, and to have her all his days. 

Good riddance! Let the girl go roving to find herself 

a man from foreign parts. She only spurns her own — 

countless Phaeacians round about who court her, 

nothing but our best. ' 

So they'll scoff... 
just think of the scandal that would face me then. 
I'd find fault with a girl who carried on that way, 
flouting her parents' wishes — father, mother, still alive — 
consorting with men before she'd tied the knot in public. 
No, stranger, listen closely to what 1 say, the sooner 
to win your swift voyage home at my father's hands. 
Now, you'll find a splendid grove along the road — 
poplars, sacred to Pallas — 

a bubbling spring's inside and meadows run around it. 
There lies my father's estate, his blooming orchard too, 
as far from town as a man's strong shout can carry. 
Take a seat there, wait a while, and give us time 
to make it into town and reach my father's house. 
Then, when you think we're home, walk on yourself 
to the city, ask the way to my father's palace, 
generous King Alcinous. You cannot miss it, 
even an innocent child could guide you there. 
No other Phaeacian's house is built like that: 
so grand, the palace of Alcinous, our great hero. 
Once the mansion and courtyard have enclosed you, go, 
quickly, across the hall until you reach my mother. 



Beside the hearth she sits in the fire's glare, 

spinning yarn on a spindle, sea-blue wool — 

a stirring sight, you'll see ... 

she leans against a pillar, her ladies sit behind. 

And my father's throne is drawn up close beside her; 

there he sits and takes his wine, a mortal like a god. 

Go past him, grasp my mother's knees — if you want 

to see the day of your return, rejoicing, soon, 

even if your home's a world away. 

If only the queen will take you to her heart, 

then there's hope that you will see your loved ones, 

reach your own grand house, your native land at last." 

At that she touched the mules with her shining whip 
and they quickly left the running stream behind. 
The team trotted on, their hoofs wove in and out. 
She drove them back with care so all the rest, 
maids and Odysseus, could keep the pace on foot, 
and she used the whip discreetly. 
The sun sank as they reached the hallowed grove, 
sacred to Athena, where Odysseus stopped and sat 
and said a prayer at once to mighty Zeus's daughter: 
"Hear me, daughter of Zeus whose shield is thunder — 
tireless one, Athena! Now hear my prayer at last, 
for you never heard me then, when 1 was shattered, 
when the famous god of earthquakes wrecked my craft. 
Grant that here among the Phaeacian people 
1 may find some mercy and some love!" 

So he prayed and Athena heard his prayer 
but would not yet appear to him undisguised. 
She stood in awe of her Father's brother, lord of the sea 
who still seethed on, still churning with rage against 
the great Odysseus till he reached his native land. 



 



Phaeacia's Halls 
and Gardens 



Now as Odysseus, long an exile, prayed in Athena's grove, 

the hardy mule-team drew the princess toward the city. 

Reaching her father's splendid halls, she reined in, 

just at the gates — her brothers clustering round her, 

men like gods, released the mules from the yoke 

and brought the clothes indoors 

as Nausicaa made her way toward her bedroom. 

There her chambermaid lit a fire for her — 

Eury medusa, the old woman who'd come from Apiraea 

years ago, when the rolling ships had sailed her in 

and the country picked her out as King Alcinous' prize, 

for he ruled all the Phaeacians, they obeyed him like a god. 

Once, she had nursed the white-armed princess in the palace. 

Now she lit a fire and made her supper in the room. 



At the same time, Odysseus set off toward the city. 
Pallas Athena, harboring kindness for the hero, 
drifted a heavy mist around him, shielding him 
from any swaggering islander who'd cross his path, 
provoke him with taunts and search out who he was. 
Instead, as he was about to enter the welcome city, 
the bright-eyed goddess herself came up to greet him there, 
for all the world like a young girl, holding a pitcher, 
standing face-to-face with the visitor, who asked, 
"Little girl, now wouldn't you be my guide 
to the palace of the one they call Alcinous? 
The king who rules the people of these parts. 
1 am a stranger, you see, weighed down with troubles, 
come this way from a distant, far-off shore. 
So 1 know no one here, none at all 
in your city and the farmlands round about. " 

"Oh yes, sir, 

good old stranger," the bright-eyed goddess said, 
"I'll show you the very palace that you're after — 
the king lives right beside my noble father. 
Come, quietly too, and 1 will lead the way. 
Now not a glance at anyone, not a question. 
The men here never suffer strangers gladly, 
have no love for hosting a man from foreign lands. 
All they really trust are their fast, flying ships 
that cross the mighty ocean. Gifts of Poseidon, 
ah what ships they are — 
quick as a bird, quick as a darting thought!" 

And Pallas Athena sped away in the lead 
as he followed in her footsteps, man and goddess. 
But the famed Phaeacian sailors never saw him, 
right in their midst, striding down their streets. 
Athena the one with lovely braids would not permit it, 
the awesome goddess poured an enchanted mist around him, 
harboring kindness for Odysseus in her heart. 
And he marveled now at the balanced ships and havens, 



the meeting grounds of the great lords and the long ramparts 
looming, coped and crowned with palisades of stakes — 
an amazing sight to see ... 

And once they reached the king's resplendent halls 

the bright-eyed goddess cried out, "Good old stranger, 

here, here is the very palace that you're after — 

I've pointed you all the way. Here you'll find 

our princes dear to the gods, busy feasting. 

You go on inside. Be bold, nothing to fear. 

In every venture the bold man comes off best, 

even the wanderer, bound from distant shores. 

The queen is the first you'll light on in the halls. 

Arete, she is called, and earns the name: 

she answers all our prayers. She comes, in fact, 

from the same stock that bred our King Alcinous. 

First came Nausithous, son of the earthquake god 

Poseidon and Periboea, the lovely, matchless beauty, 

the youngest daughter of iron- willed Eurymedon, 

king of the overweening Giants years ago. 

He led that reckless clan to its own ruin, 

killed himself in the bargain, but the Sea-lord 

lay in love with Periboea and she produced a son, 

Nausithous, that lionheart who ruled Phaeacia well. 

Now, Nausithous had two sons, Rhexenor and Alcinous, 

but the lord of the silver bow, Apollo, shot Rhexenor down — 

married, true, yet still without a son in the halls, 

he left one child behind, a daughter named Arete. 

Alcinous made the girl his wife and honors her 

as no woman is honored on this earth, of all the wives 

now keeping households under their husbands' sway. 

Such is her pride of place, and always will be so: 

dear to her loving children, to Alcinous himself 

and all our people. They gaze on Jier as a god, 

saluting her warmly on her walks through town. 

She lacks nothing in good sense and judgment — 

she can dissolve quarrels, even among men, 

whoever wins her sympathies. 



If only our queen will take you to her heart, 

then there's hope that you will see your loved ones, 

reach your high-roofed house, your native land at last." 

And with that vow the bright-eyed goddess sped away, 
over the barren sea, leaving welcome Scheria far behind, 
and reaching Marathon and the spacious streets of Athens, 
entered Erechtheus' sturdy halls, Athena's stronghold. 
Now as Odysseus approached Alcinous' famous house 
a rush of feelings stirred within his heart, 
bringing him to a standstill, 
even before he crossed the bronze threshold ... 
A radiance strong as the moon or rising sun came flooding 
through the high-roofed halls of generous King Alcinous. 
Walls plated in bronze, crowned with a circling frieze 
glazed as blue as lapis, ran to left and right 
from outer gates to the deepest court recess. 
Solid golden doors enclosed the palace. 
Up from the bronze threshold silver doorposts rose 
with silver lintel above, and golden handle hooks. 
And dogs of gold and silver were stationed either side, 
forged by the god of fire with all his cunning craft 
to keep watch on generous King Alcinous' palace now, 
his immortal guard-dogs, ageless, all their days. 
Inside to left and right, in a long unbroken row 
from farthest outer gate to the inmost chamber, 
thrones stood backed against the wall, each draped 
with a finely spun brocade, women's handsome work. 
Here the Phaeacian lords would sit enthroned, 
dining, drinking — ^the feast flowed on forever. 
And young boys, molded of gold, set on pedestals 
standing firm, were lifting torches high in their hands 
to flare through the nights and light the feasters down the hall. 
And Alcinous has some fifty serving-women in his house: 
some, turning the handmill, grind the apple-yellow grain, 
some weave at their webs or sit and spin their yarn, 
fingers flickering quick as aspen leaves in the wind 
and the densely woven woolens dripping oil droplets. 



Just as Phaeacian men excel the world at sailing, 
driving their swift ships on the open seas, 
so the women excel at all the arts of weaving. 
That is Athena's gift to them beyond all others — 
a genius for lovely work, and a fine mind too. 

Outside the courtyard, fronting the high gates, 
a magnificent orchard stretches four acres deep 
with a strong fence running round it side-to-side. 
Here luxuriant trees are always in their prime, 
pomegranates and pears, and apples glowing red, 
succulent figs and olives swelling sleek and dark. 
And the yield of all these trees will never flag or die, 
neither in winter nor in summer, a harvest all year round 
for the West Wind always breathing through will bring 
some fruits to the bud and others warm to ripeness — 
pear mellowing ripe on pear, apple on apple, 
cluster of grapes on cluster, fig crowding fig. 
And here is a teeming vineyard planted for the kings, 
beyond it an open level bank where the vintage grapes 
lie baking to raisins in the sun while pickers gather others; 
some they trample down in vats, and here in the front rows 
bunches of unripe grapes have hardly shed their blooms 
while others under the sunlight slowly darken purple. 
And there by the last rows are beds of greens, 
bordered and plotted, greens of every kind, 
glistening fresh, year in, year out. And last, 
there are two springs, one rippling in channels 
over the whole orchard — ^the other, flanking it, 
rushes under the palace gates 
to bubble up in front of the lofty roofs 
where the city people come and draw their water. 

Such 

the gifts, the glories showered down by the gods 
on King Alcinous' realm. 

And there Odysseus stood, 
gazing at all this bounty, a man who'd borne so much ... 
Once he'd had his fill of marveling at it all. 



he crossed the threshold quickly, 
strode inside the palace. Here he found 
the Phaeacian lords and captains tipping out 
libations now to the guide and giant-killer Hermes, 
the god to whom they would always pour the final cup 
before they sought their beds. Odysseus went on 
striding down the hall, the man of many struggles 
shrouded still in the mist Athena drifted round him, 
till he reached Arete and Alcinous the king. And then, 
the moment he flung his arms around Arete s knees, 
the godsent mist rolled back to reveal the great man. 
And silence seized the feasters all along the hall — 
seeing him right before their eyes, they marveled, 
gazing on him now as Odysseus pleaded, "Queen, 
Arete, daughter of godlike King Rhexenor! 
Here after many trials 1 come to beg for mercy, 
your husband's, yours, and all these feasters' here. 
May the gods endow them with fortune all their lives, 
may each hand down to his sons the riches in his house 
and the pride of place the realm has granted him. 
But as for myself, grant me a rapid convoy home 
to my own native land. How far away I've been 
from all my loved ones — how long 1 have suffered!" 

Pleading so, the man sank down in the ashes, 
just at the hearth beside the blazing fire, 
while all the rest stayed hushed, stock-still. 
At last the old revered Echeneus broke the spell, 
the eldest lord in Phaeacia, finest speaker too, 
a past master at all the island's ancient ways. 
Impelled by kindness now, he rose and said, 
"This is no way, Alcinous. How indecent, look, 
our guest on the ground, in the ashes by the fire! 
Your people are holding back, waiting for your signal. 
Come, raise him up and seat the stranger now, 
in a silver-studded chair, 
and tell the heralds to mix more wine for all 
so we can pour out cups to Zeus who loves the lightning. 



champion of suppliants — suppliants' rights are sacred. 
And let the housekeeper give our guest his supper, 
unstinting with her stores." 

Hearing that, 
Alcinous, poised in all his majesty, took the hand 
of the seasoned, worldly-wise Odysseus, raised him up 
from the hearth and sat him down in a burnished chair, 
displacing his own son, the courtly Lord Laodamas 
who had sat beside him, the son he loved the most. 
A maid brought water soon in a graceful golden pitcher 
and over a silver basin tipped it out 
so the guest might rinse his hands, 
then pulled a gleaming table to his side. 
A staid housekeeper brought on bread to serve him, 
appetizers aplenty too, lavish with her bounty. 
As long-suffering great Odysseus ate and drank, 
the hallowed King Alcinous called his herald: 
"Come, Pontonous! Mix the wine in the bowl, 
pour rounds to all our banqueters in the house 
so we can pour out cups to Zeus who loves the lightning, 
champion of suppliants — suppliants' rights are sacred." 

At that Pontonous mixed the heady, honeyed wine 
and tipped first drops for the god in every cup, 
then poured full rounds for all. And once they'd poured 
libations out and drunk to their hearts' content, 
Alcinous rose and addressed his island people: 
"Hear me, lords and captains of Phaeacia, 
hear what the heart inside me has to say. 
Now, our feast finished, home you go to sleep. 
But at dawn we call the elders in to full assembly, 
host our guest in the palace, sacrifice to the gods 
and then we turn our minds to his passage home, 
so under our convoy our new friend can travel back 
to his own land — no toil, no troubles — soon, 
rejoicing, even if his home's a world away. 
And on the way no pain or hardship suffered, 
not till he sets foot on native ground again. 



There in the future he must suffer all that Fate 
and the overbearing Spinners spun out on his life line 
the very day his mother gave him birth ... But if 
he's one of the deathless powers, out of the blue, 
the gods are working now in strange, new ways. 
Always, up to now, they came to us face-to-face 
whenever we'd give them grand, glorious sacrifices — 
they always sat beside us here and shared our feasts. 
Even when some lonely traveler meets them on the roads, 
they never disguise themselves. We're too close kin for that, 
close as the wild Giants are, the Cyclops too. " 

"Alcinous!" 

wary Odysseus countered, "cross that thought from your mind. 

I'm nothing like the immortal gods who rule the skies, 

either in build or breeding. I'm just a mortal man. 

Whom do you know most saddled down with sorrow? 

They are the ones I'd equal, grief for grief. 

And 1 could tell a tale of still more hardship, 

all I've suffered, thanks to the gods' will. 

But despite my misery, let me finish dinner. 

The belly's a shameless dog, there's nothing worse. 

Always insisting, pressing, it never lets us forget — 

destroyed as 1 am, my heart racked with sadness, 

sick with anguish, still it keeps demanding, 

'Eat, drink!' It blots out all the memory 

of my pain, commanding, 'Fill me up!' 

But you, 

at the first light of day, hurry, please, 

to set your unlucky guest on his own home soil. 

How much 1 have suffered ... Oh just let me see 

my lands, my serving-men and the grand high-roofed house — 

then 1 can die in peace." 

All burst into applause, 
urging passage home for their newfound friend, 
his pleading rang so true. And once they 'd poured 
libations out and drunk to their hearts' content, 
each one made his way to rest in his own house. 



But King Odysseus still remained at hall, 

seated beside the royal Alcinous and Arete 

as servants cleared the cups and plates away. 

The white-armed Queen Arete took the lead; 

she'd spotted the cape and shirt Odysseus wore, 

fine clothes she'd made herself with all her women, 

so now her words flew brusquely, sharply: "Stranger, 

I'll be the first to question you — myself. 

Who are you? Where are you from? 

Who gave you the clothes you're wearing now? 

Didn't you say you reached us roving on the sea? " 

"What hard labor, queen, " the man of craft replied, 
"to tell you the story of my troubles start to finish. 
The gods on high have given me my share. Still, 
this much 1 will tell you ... 
seeing you probe and press me so intently. 
There is an island, Ogygia, lying far at sea, 
where the daughter of Atlas, Calypso, has her home, 
the seductive nymph with lovely braids — a danger too, 
and no one, god or mortal, dares approach her there. But 1, 
cursed as 1 am, some power brought me to her hearth, 
alone, when Zeus with a white-hot bolt had crushed 
my racing warship down the wine-dark sea. 
There all the rest of my loyal shipmates died 
but 1, locking my arms around my good ship's keel, 
drifted along nine days. On the tenth, at dead of night, 
the gods cast me up on Ogygia, Calypso's island, 
home of the dangerous nymph with glossy braids, 
and the goddess took me in in all her kindness, 
welcomed me warmly, cherished me, even vowed 
to make me immortal, ageless, all my days — 
but she never won the heart inside me, never. 
Seven endless years 1 remained there, always drenching 
with my tears the immortal clothes Calypso gave me. 
Then, at last, when the eighth came wheeling round, 
she insisted that 1 sail — inspired by warnings sent 



from Zeus, perhaps, or her own mind had changed. 

She saw me on my way in a solid craft, 

tight and trim, and gave me full provisions, 

food and mellow wine, immortal clothes to wear 

and summoned a wind to bear me onward, fair and warm. 

And seventeen days 1 sailed, making headway well; 

on the eighteenth, shadowy mountains slowly loomed ... 

your land! My heart leapt up, unlucky as 1 am, 

doomed to be comrade still to many hardships. 

Many pains the god of earthquakes piled upon me, 

loosing the winds against me, blocking passage through, 

heaving up a terrific sea, beyond belief — nor did the whitecaps 

let me cling to my craft, for all my desperate groaning. 

No, the squalls shattered her stem to stern, but 1, 

1 swam hard, 1 plowed my way through those dark gulfs 

till at last the wind and current bore me to your shores. 

But here, had 1 tried to land, the breakers would have hurled me, 

smashed me against the jagged cliffs of that grim coast, 

so 1 pulled away, swam back till 1 reached a river, 

the perfect spot at last, or so it struck me, 

free of rocks, with a windbreak from the gales. 

So, fighting for life, 1 flung myself ashore 

and the godsent, bracing night came on at once. 

Clambering up from the river, big with Zeus's rains, 

1 bedded down in the brush, my body heaped with leaves, 

and a god poured down a boundless sleep upon me, yes, 

and there in the leaves, exhausted, sick at heart, 

1 slept the whole night through 

and on to the break of day and on into high noon 

and the sun was wheeling down when sweet sleep set me free. 

And 1 looked up, and there were your daughter's maids 

at play on the beach, and she, she moved among them 

like a deathless goddess! 1 begged her for help 

and not once did her sense of tact desert her; 

she behaved as you'd never hope to find 

in one so young, not in a random meeting — 

time and again the youngsters prove so flighty. 

Not she. She gave me food aplenty and shining wine. 



a bath in the river too, and gave me all this clothing. 
That's my whole story. Wrenching to tell, but true." 

"Ah, but in one regard, my friend," the king replied, 
"her good sense missed the mark, this daughter of mine. 
She never escorted you to our house with all her maids 
but sAe^Nas the first you asked for care and shelter." 

"Your majesty," diplomatic Odysseus answered, 
"don't find fault with a flawless daughter now, 
not for my sake, please. 
She urged me herself to follow with her maids. 
1 chose not to, fearing embarrassment in fact — 
what if you took offense, seeing us both together? 
Suspicious we are, we men who walk the earth." 

"Oh no, my friend," Alcinous stated flatly, 
"I'm hardly a man for reckless, idle anger. 
Balance is best in all things. 
Father Zeus, Athena and lord Apollo! if only — 
seeing the man you are, seeing we think as one — 
you could wed my daughter and be my son-in-law 
and stay right here with us. I'd give you a house 
and great wealth — if you chose to stay, that is. 
No Phaeacian would hold you back by force. 
The curse of Father Zeus on such a thing! 
And about your convoy home, you rest assured: 
1 have chosen the day and 1 decree it is tomorrow. 
And all that voyage long you'll lie in a deep sleep 
while my people sail you on through calm and gentle tides 
till you reach your land and house, or any place you please. 
True, even if landfall lies more distant than Euboea, 
off at the edge of the world ... 
So say our crews, at least, who saw it once, 
that time they carried the gold-haired Rhadamanthys 
out to visit Tity us, son of Mother Earth. Imagine, 
there they sailed and back they came in the same day, 
they finished the homeward run with no strain at all. 



You'll see for yourself how far they top the best — 
my ships and their young shipmates 
tossing up the whitecaps with their oars!" 

So he vowed 

and the Jong-enduring great Odysseus glowed with joy 

and raised a prayer and called the god by name: 

"Father Zeus on high — 

may the king fulfill his promises one and all! 

Then his fame would ring through the fertile earth 

and never die — and 1 should reach my native land at last!" 

And now as the two men exchanged their hopes, 
the white-armed queen instructed her palace maids 
to make a bed in the porch's shelter, lay down 
some heavy purple throws for the bed itself, 
and over it spread some blankets, thick woolly robes, 
a warm covering laid on top. Torches in hand, 
they left the hall and fell to work at once, 
briskly prepared a good snug resting-place 
and then returned to Odysseus, urged the guest, 
"Up, friend, time for sleep. Your bed is made." 
How welcome the thought of sleep to that man now ... 
So there after many trials Odysseus lay at rest 
on a corded bed inside the echoing colonnade. 
Alcinous slept in chambers deep in his lofty house 
where the queen his wife arranged and shared their bed. 



 



A Day for Songs 
and Contests 



when young Dawn with her rose-red fingers shone once more 

royal Alcinous, hallowed island king, rose from bed 

and great Odysseus, raider of cities, rose too. 

Poised in his majesty, Alcinous led the way 

to Phaeacia's meeting grounds, built for all 

beside the harbored ships. Both men sat down 

on the polished stone benches side-by-side 

as Athena started roaming up and down the town, 

in build and voice the wise Alcinous' herald, 

furthering plans for Odysseus' journey home, 

and stopped beside each citizen, urged them all, 

"Come this way, you lords and captains of Phaeacia, 

come to the meeting grounds and learn about the stranger! 

A new arrival! Here at our wise king's palace now, 

he's here from roving the ocean, driven far off course — 



he looks like a deathless god!" 

Rousing their zeal, 
their curiosity, each and every man, and soon enough 
the assembly seats were filled with people thronging, 
gazing in wonder at the seasoned man of war ... 
Over Odysseus' head and shoulders now 
Athena lavished a marvelous splendor, yes, 
making him taller, more massive to all eyes, 
so Phaeacians might regard the man with kindness, 
awe and respect as well, and he might win through 
the many trials they 'd pose to test the hero's strength. 
Once they'd grouped, crowding the meeting grounds, 
Alcinous rose and addressed his island people: 
"Hear me, lords and captains of Phaeacia, 
hear what the heart inside me has to say. 
This stranger here, our guest — 
1 don't know who he is, or whether he comes 
from sunrise lands or the western lands of evening, 
but he has come in his wanderings to my palace; 
he pleads for passage, he begs we guarantee it. 
So now, as in years gone by, let us press on 
and grant him escort. No one, 1 tell you, no one 
who comes to my house will languish long here, 
heartsick for convoy home. 

Come, my people! 
Haul a black ship down to the bright sea, 
rigged for her maiden voyage — 
enlist a crew of fifty -two young sailors, 
the best in town, who've proved their strength before. 
Let all hands lash their oars to the thwarts then disembark, 
come to my house and fall in for a banquet, quickly. 
I'll lay on a princely feast for all. So then, 
these are the orders 1 issue to our crews. 
For the rest, you sceptered princes here, 
you come to my royal halls so we can give 
this stranger a hero's welcome in our palace — 
no one here refuse. Call in the inspired bard 
Demodocus. God has given the man the gift of song. 



to him beyond all others, the power to please, 
however the spirit stirs him on to sing." 

With those commands Alcinous led the way 
and a file of sceptered princes took his lead, 
while the herald went to find the gifted bard. 
And the fifty -two young sailors, duly chosen, 
briskly following orders, 
went down to the shore of the barren salt sea. 
And once they reached the ship at the surf 's edge, 
first they hauled the craft into deeper water, 
stepped the mast amidships, canvas brailed, 
they made oars fast in the leather oarlock straps, 
moored her riding high on the swell, then disembarked 
and made their way to wise Alcinous' high-roofed halls. 
There colonnades and courts and rooms were overflowing 
with crowds, a mounting host of people young and old. 
The king slaughtered a dozen sheep to feed his guests, 
eight boars with shining tusks and a pair of shambling oxen. 
These they skinned and dressed, and then laid out a feast 
to fill the heart with savor. 

In came the herald now, 
leading along the faithful bard the Muse adored 
above all others, true, but her gifts were mixed 
with good and evil both: she stripped him of sight 
but gave the man the power of stirring, rapturous song. 
Pontonous brought the bard a silver-studded chair, 
right amid the feasters, leaning it up against 
a central column — hung his high clear lyre 
on a peg above his head and showed him how 
to reach up with his hands and lift it down. 
And the herald placed a table by his side 
with a basket full of bread and cup of wine 
for him to sip when his spirit craved refreshment. 
All reached out for the good things that lay at hand 
and when they 'd put aside desire for food and drink, 
the Muse inspired the bard 
to sing the famous deeds of fighting heroes — 



the song whose fame had reached the skies those days: 
The Strife Between Odysseus and Achilles, Peleus' Son ... 
how once at the gods' flowing feast the captains clashed 
in a savage war of words, while Agamemnon, lord of armies, 
rejoiced at heart that Achaea's bravest men were battling so. 
For this was the victory sign that Apollo prophesied 
at his shrine in Py tho when Agamemnon strode across 
the rocky threshold, asking the oracle for advice — 
the start of the tidal waves of ruin tumbling down 
on Troy 's and Achaea's forces, both at once, 
thanks to the will of Zeus who rules the world. 

That was the song the famous harper sang 
but Odysseus, clutching his flaring sea-blue cape 
in both powerful hands, drew it over his head 
and buried his handsome face, 
ashamed his hosts might see him shedding tears. 
Whenever the rapt bard would pause in the song, 
he'd lift the cape from his head, wipe off his tears 
and hoisting his double-handled cup, pour it out to the gods. 
But soon as the bard would start again, impelled to sing 
by Phaeacia's lords, who reveled in his tale, 
again Odysseus hid his face and wept. 
His weeping went unmarked by all the others; 
only Alcinous, sitting close beside him, 
noticed his guest's tears, 
heard the groan in the man's labored breathing 
and said at once to the master mariners around him, 
"Hear me, my lords and captains of Phaeacia! 
By now we've had our fill of food well-shared 
and the lyre too, our loyal friend at banquets. 
Now out we go again and test ourselves in contests, 
games of every kind — so our guest can tell his friends, 
when he reaches home, how far we excel the world 
at boxing, wrestling, jumping, speed of foot." 

He forged ahead and the rest fell in behind. 
The herald hung the ringing lyre back on its peg 



and taking Demodocus by the hand, led him from the palace, 

guiding him down the same path the island lords 

had just pursued, keen to watch the contests. 

They reached the meeting grounds 

with throngs of people streaming in their trail 

as a press of young champions rose for competition. 

Topsail and Riptide rose, the helmsman Rowhard too 

and Seaman and Sternman, Surf-at-the-Beach and Stroke-Oar, 

Breaker and Bowsprit, Racing-the-Wind and Swing-Aboard 

and Seagirt the son of Greatfleet, Shipwrightson 

and the son of Launcher, Broadsea, rose up too, 

a match for murderous Ares, death to men — 

in looks and build the best of all Phaeacians 

after gallant Laodamas, the Captain of the People. 

Laodamas rose with two more sons of great Alcinous, 

Halius bred to the sea and Cly toneus famed for ships. 

And now the games began, the first event a footrace ... 

They toed the line — 

and broke flat out from the start 
with a fast pack flying down the field in a whirl of dust 
and Cly toneus the prince outstripped them all by far, 
flashing ahead the length two mules will plow a furrow 
before he turned for home, leaving the pack behind 
and raced to reach the crowds. 

Next the wrestling, 
grueling sport. They grappled, locked, and Broadsea, 
pinning the strongest champions, won the bouts. 
Next, in the jumping. Seagirt leapt and beat the field. 
In the discus Rowhard up and outhurled them all by far. 
And the king's good son Laodamas boxed them to their knees. 
When all had enjoyed the games to their hearts' content 
Alcinous' son Laodamas spurred them: "Come, my friends, 
let's ask our guest if he knows the ropes of any sport. 
He's no mean man, not with a build like that ... 
Look at his thighs, his legs, and what a pair of arms — 
his massive neck, his big, rippling strength! 
Nor is he past his prime, 
just beaten down by one too many blows. 



Nothing worse than the sea, I always say, 
to crush a man, the strongest man ahve. " 

And Broadsea put in quickly, 
"Well said, Laodamas, right to the point. 
Go up to the fellow, challenge him yourself. " 

On that cue, the noble prince strode up 
before Odysseus, front and center, asking, 
"Come, stranger, sir, won't you try your hand 
at our contests now? If you have skill in any. 
It's fit and proper for you to know your sports. 
What greater glory attends a man, while he's alive, 
than what he wins with his racing feet and striving hands? 
Come and compete then, throw your cares to the wind! 
It won't be long, your journey's not far off — 
your ship's already hauled down to the sea, 
your crew is set to sail." 

"Laodamas," 
quick to the mark Odysseus countered sharply, 
"why do you taunt me so with such a challenge? 
Pains weigh on my spirit now, not your sports — 
I've suffered much already, struggled hard. 
But here 1 sit amid your assembly still, 
starved for passage home, begging your king, 
begging all your people." 

"Oh 1 knew it!" 
Broadsea broke in, mocking him to his face. 
"1 never took you for someone skilled in games, 
the kind that real men play throughout the world. 
Not a chance. You're some skipper of profiteers, 
roving the high seas in his scudding craft, 
reckoning up his freight with a keen eye out 
for home-cargo, grabbing the gold he can! 
You're no athlete. 1 see that." 

With a dark glance 
wily Odysseus shot back, "Indecent talk, my friend. 



You, you're a reckless fool — 1 see that. So, 

the gods don't hand out all their gifts at once, 

not build and brains and flowing speech to all. 

One man may fail to impress us with his looks 

but a god can crown his words with beauty, charm, 

and men look on with delight when he speaks out. 

Never faltering, filled with winning self-control, 

he shines forth at assembly grounds and people gaze 

at him like a god when /?£• walks through the streets. 

Another man may look like a deathless one on high 

but there's not a bit of grace to crown his words. 

Just like you, my fine, handsome friend. Not even 

a god could improve those lovely looks of yours 

but the mind inside is worthless. 

Your slander fans the anger in my heart! 

I'm no stranger to sports — for all your taunts — 

I've held my place in the front ranks, 1 tell you, 

long as 1 could trust to my youth and striving hands. 

But now I'm wrestled down by pain and hardship, look, 

I've borne my share of struggles, cleaving my way 

through wars of men and pounding waves at sea. 

Nevertheless, despite so many blows, 

I'll give your games a whirl. Your insults 

cut to the quick — you rouse my fighting blood!" 

Up he sprang, cloak and all, and seized a discus, 
huge and heavy, more weighty by far than those 
the Phaeacians used to hurl and test each other. 
Wheeling round, he let loose with his great hand 
and the stone whirred on — and down to ground they went, 
those lords of the long oars and master mariners cringing 
under the rock's onrush, soaring lightly out of his grip, 
flying away past all the other marks, and Queen Athena, 
built like a man, staked out the spot and cried 
with a voice of triumph, "Even a blind man, 
friend, could find your mark by groping round — 
it's not mixed up in the crowd, it's far in front! 



There's nothing to fear in this event — 

no one can touch you, much less beat your distance!" 

At that the heart of the long-suffering hero laughed, 
so glad to find a ready friend in the crowd that, 
lighter in mood, he challenged all Phaeacia's best: 
"Now go match that, you young pups, and straightaway 
I'll hurl you another just as far, 1 swear, or even farther! 
All the rest of you, anyone with the spine and spirit, 
step right up and try me — you've incensed me so — 
at boxing, wrestling, racing; nothing daunts me. 
Any Phaeacian here except Laodamas himself. 
The man's my host. Who would fight his friend? 
He'd have to be good-for-nothing, senseless, yes, 
to challenge his host and come to grips in games, 
in a far-off land at that. He'd cut his own legs short. 
But there are no others I'd deny or think beneath me — 
I'll take on all contenders, gladly, test them head-to-head! 
I'm not half bad in the world of games where men compete. 
Well 1 know how to handle a fine polished bow, 
the first to hit my man in a mass of enemies, 
even with rows of comrades pressing near me, 
taking aim with our shafts to hit our targets. 
Philoctetes alone outshot me there at Troy 
when ranks of Achaean archers bent their bows. 
Of the rest I'd say that 1 outclass them all — 
men still alive, who eat their bread on earth. 
But I'd never vie with the men of days gone by, 
not Heracles, not Eurytus of Oechalia — archers 
who rivaled immortal powers with their bows. 
That's why noble Eurytus died a sudden death: 
no old age, creeping upon him in his halls ... 
Apollo shot him down, enraged that the man 
had challenged hJjn, the Archer God. 

As for spears, 

1 can fling a spear as far as the next man wings an arrow! 
Only at sprinting 1 fear you'd leave me in the dust. 
I've taken a shameful beating out on heavy seas. 



no conditioning there on shipboard day by day. 
My legs have lost their spring. " 

He finished. All stood silent, hushed. 
Only Alcinous found a way to answer. "Stranger, 
friend — nothing you say among us seems ungracious. 
You simply want to display the gifts you're born with, 
stung that a youngster marched up to you in the games, 
mocking, ridiculing your prowess as no one would 
who had some sense of fit and proper speech. 
But come now, hear me out, 
so you can tell our story to other lords 
as you sit and feast in your own halls someday, 
your own wife and your children by your side, 
remembering there our island prowess here: 
what skills great Zeus has given us as well, 
down all the years from our fathers' days till now. 
We're hardly world-class boxers or wrestlers, 1 admit, 
but we can race like the wind, we're champion sailors too, 
and always dear to our hearts, the feast, the lyre and dance 
and changes of fresh clothes, our warm baths and beds. 
So come — all you Phaeacian masters of the dance — 
now dance away! So our guest can tell his friends, 
when he reaches home, how far we excel the world 
in sailing, nimble footwork, dance and song. 

Go, someone, 
quickly, fetch Demodocus now his ringing lyre. 
It must be hanging somewhere in the palace." 

At the king's word the herald sprang to his feet 
and ran to fetch the ringing lyre from the house. 
And stewards rose, nine in all, picked from the realm 
to set the stage for contests: masters-at-arms who 
leveled the dancing-floor to make a fine broad ring. 
The herald returned and placed the vibrant lyre now 
in Demodocus' hands, and the bard moved toward the center, 
flanked by boys in the flush of youth, skilled dancers 
who stamped the ground with marvelous pulsing steps 



as Odysseus gazed at their flying, flashing feet, 
his heart aglow with wonder. 

A rippling prelude — 
now the bard struck up an irresistible song: 
The Love of Ares and Aphrodite Crowned with flowers ... 
how the two had first made love in Hephaestus' mansion, 
all in secret. Ares had showered her with gifts 
and showered Hephaestus' marriage bed with shame 
but a messenger ran to tell the god of fire — 
Helios, lord of the sun, who'd spied the couple 
lost in each other 's arms and making love. 
Hephaestus, hearing the heart- wounding story, 
bustled toward his forge, brooding on his revenge — 
planted the huge anvil on its block and beat out chains, 
not to be slipped or broken, all to pin the lovers on the spot. 
This snare the Firegod forged, ablaze with his rage at War, 
then limped to the room where the bed of love stood firm 
and round the posts he poured the chains in a sweeping net 
with streams of others flowing down from the roofbeam, 
gossamer-fine as spider webs no man could see, 
not even a blissful god — 
the Smith had forged a masterwork of guile. 
Once he'd spun that cunning trap around his bed 
he feigned a trip to the well-built town of Lemnos, 
dearest to him by far of all the towns on earth. 
But the god of battle kept no blind man's watch. 
As soon as he saw the Master Craftsman leave 
he plied his golden reins and arrived at once 
and entered the famous god of fire's mansion, 
chafing with lust for Aphrodite crowned with flowers. 
She'd just returned from her father's palace, mighty Zeus, 
and now she sat in her rooms as Ares strode right in 
and grasped her hand with a warm, seductive urging: 
"Quick, my darling, come, let's go to bed 
and lose ourselves in love! Your husband's away — 
by now he must be off in the wilds of Lemnos, 
consorting with his raucous Sintian friends. " 

So he pressed 



and her heart raced with joy to sleep with War 

and off they went to bed and down they lay — 

and down around them came those cunning chains 

of the crafty god of fire, showering down now 

till the couple could not move a limb or lift a finger — 

then they knew at last: there was no way out, not now. 

But now the glorious crippled Smith was drawing near ... 

he'd turned around, miles short of the Lemnos coast, 

for the Sungod kept Azswatch and told Hephaestus all, 

so back he rushed to his house, his heart consumed with anguish. 

Halting there at the gates, seized with savage rage 

he howled a terrible cry, imploring all the gods, 

"Father Zeus, look here — 

the rest of you happy gods who live forever — 

here is a sight to make you laugh, revolt you too! 

Just because 1 am crippled, Zeus's daughter Aphrodite 

will always spurn me and love that devastating Ares, 

just because of his stunning looks and racer's legs 

while 1 am a weakling, lame from birth, and who's to blame? 

Both my parents — ^who else? If only they 'd never bred me! 

Just look at the two lovers ... crawled inside my bed, 

locked in each other's arms — ^the sight makes me burn! 

But 1 doubt they'll want to lie that way much longer, 

not a moment more — mad as they are for each other. 

No, they'll soon tire of bedding down together, 

but then my cunning chains will bind them fast 

till our Father pays my bride-gifts back in full, 

all 1 handed Jum for that shameless bitch his daughter, 

irresistible beauty — all unbridled too!" 

So Hephaestus wailed 
as the gods came crowding up to his bronze-floored house. 
Poseidon god of the earthquake came, and Hermes came, 
the running god of luck, and the Archer, lord Apollo, 
while modesty kept each goddess to her mansion. 
The immortals, givers of all good things, stood at the gates, 
and uncontrollable laughter burst from the happy gods 
when they saw the god of fire's subtle, cunning work. 
One would glance at his neighbor, laughing out. 



"A bad day for adultery! Slow outstrips the Swift. " 

"Look how limping Hephaestus conquers War, 
quickest of all the gods who rule Olympus!" 

"The cripple wins by craft." 

"The adulterer, 

Aewill pay the price!" 

So the gods would banter 
among themselves but lord Apollo goaded Hermes on: 
"Tell me, Quicksilver, giver of all good things — 
even with those unwieldy shackles wrapped around you, 
how would you like to bed the golden Aphrodite?" 

"Oh Apollo, if only!" the giant-killer cried. 
"Archer, bind me down with triple those endless chains! 
Let all you gods look on, and all you goddesses too — 
how I'd love to bed that golden Aphrodite!" 

A peal of laughter broke from the deathless ones 
but not Poseidon, not a smile from him; he kept on 
begging the famous Smith to loose the god of war, 
pleading, his words flying, "Let him go! 
1 guarantee you Ares will pay the price, 
whatever you ask, Hephaestus, 
whatever's right in the eyes of all the gods. " 

But the famous crippled Smith appealed in turn, 
"God of the earthquake, please don't urge this on me. 
A pledge for a worthless man is a worthless pledge indeed. 
What if he slips out of his chains — his debts as well? 
How could 1 shackle youyNhile all the gods look on?" 

But the god of earthquakes reassured the Smith, 
"Look, Hephaestus, if Ares scuttles off and away, 
squirming out of his debt, I'll pay the fine myself." 

And the famous crippled Smith complied at last: 
"Now there's an offer 1 really can't refuse!" 



With all his force the god of fire loosed the chains 
and the two lovers, free of the bonds that overwhelmed them so, 
sprang up and away at once, and the Wargod sped to Thrace 
while Love with her telltale laughter sped to Paphos, 
Cyprus Isle, where her grove and scented altar stand. 
There the Graces bathed and anointed her with oil, 
ambrosial oil, the bloom that clings to the gods 
who never die, and swathed her round in gowns 
to stop the heart ... an ecstasy — a vision. 

That was the song the famous harper sang 
and Odysseus retished every note as the islanders, 
the lords of the long oars and master mariners rejoiced. 

Next the king asked Halius and Laodamas to dance, 
the two alone, since none could match that pair. 
So taking in hand a gleaming sea-blue ball, 
made by the craftsman Poly bus — arching back, 
one prince would hurl it toward the shadowy clouds 
as the other leaping high into the air would catch it 
quickly, nimbly, before his feet hit ground again. 
Once they'd vied at throwing the ball straight up, 
they tossed it back and forth in a blur of hands 
as they danced across the earth that feeds us all, 
while boys around the ring stamped out the beat 
and a splendid rhythmic drumming sound arose, 
and good Odysseus looked at his host, exclaiming, 
"King Alcinous, shining among your island people, 
you boasted Phaeacia's dancers are the best — 
they prove your point — 1 watch and I'm amazed!" 

His praises cheered the hallowed island king 
who spoke at once to the master mariners around him: 
"Hear me, my lords and captains of Phaeacia, 
our guest is a man of real taste, I'd say. Come, 
let's give him the parting gifts a guest deserves. 
There are twelve peers of the realm who rule our land, 
thirteen, counting myself. Let each of us contribute 



a fresh cloak and shirt and a bar of precious gold. 
Gather the gifts together, hurry, so our guest 
can have them all in hand when he goes to dine, 
his spirit filled with joy. 
As for Broadsea, let him make amends, 
man-to-man, with his words as well as gifts. 
His first remarks were hardly fit to hear. " 

All assented and gave their own commands, 
each noble sent a page to fetch his gifts. 
And Broadsea volunteered in turn, obliging: 
"Great Alcinous, shining among our island people, 
of course I'll make amends to our newfound friend 
as you request. I'll give the man this sword. 
It's solid bronze and the hilt has silver studs, 
the sheath around it ivory freshly carved. 
Here's a gift our guest will value highly." 

He placed the silver-studded sword in Odysseus' hands 
with a burst of warm words: "Farewell, stranger, sir — 
if any remark of mine gave you offense, 
may stormwinds snatch it up and sweep it off! 
May the gods grant you safe passage home to see your wife — 
you've been so far from loved ones, suffered so!" 

Tactful Odysseus answered him in kind: 
"And a warm farewell to you, too, my friend. 
May the gods grant you good fortune — 
may you never miss this sword, this gift you give 
with such salutes. You've made amends in full." 

With that 

he slung the silver-studded sword across his shoulder. 
As the sun sank, his glittering gifts arrived 
and proud heralds bore them into the hall 
where sons of King Alcinous took them over, 
spread them out before their noble mother's feet — 
a grand array of gifts. The king in all his majesty 
led the rest of his peers inside, following in a file 
and down they sat on rows of high-backed chairs. 



The king turned to the queen and urged her, "Come, 
my dear, bring in an elegant chest, the best you have, 
and lay inside it a fresh cloak and shirt, your own gifts. 
Then heat a bronze cauldron over the fire, boil water, 
so once our guest has bathed and reviewed his gifts — 
all neatly stacked for sailing, 
gifts our Phaeacian lords have brought him now — 
he'll feast in peace and hear the harper's songs. 
And 1 will give him this gorgeous golden cup of mine, 
so he'll remember Alcinous all his days to come 
when he pours libations out in his own house 
to Father Zeus and the other gods on high-" 

And at that Arete told her serving-women, 
"Set a great three-legged cauldron over the fire — 
do it right away!" 

And hoisting over the blaze 
a cauldron, filling it brimful with bathing water, 
they piled fresh logs beneath and lit them quickly. 
The fire lapped at the vessel's belly, the water warmed. 
Meanwhile the queen had a polished chest brought forth 
from an inner room and laid the priceless gifts inside, 
the clothes and gold the Phaeacian lords had brought, 
and added her own gifts, a cloak and a fine shirt, 
and gave her guest instructions quick and clear: 
"Now look to the lid yourself and bind it fast 
with a good tight knot, so no one can rob you 
on your voyage — drifting into a sweet sleep 
as the black ship sails you home." 

Hearing that, 
the storm-tossed man secured the lid straightway, 
he battened it fast with a swift, intricate knot 
the lady Circe had taught him long ago. 
And the housekeeper invited him at once 
to climb into a waiting tub and bathe — 
a hot, steaming bath ... 
what a welcome sight to Odysseus' eyes! 



He'd been a stranger to comforts such as these 
since he left the lovely-haired Calypso's house, 
yet all those years he enjoyed such comforts there, 
never-ending, as if he were a god ... And now, 
when maids had washed him, rubbed him down with oil 
and drawn warm fleece and a shirt around his shoulders, 
he stepped from the bath to join the nobles at their wine. 
And there stood Nausicaa as he passed. Beside a column 
that propped the sturdy roof she paused, endowed 
by the gods with all her beauty, gazing at 
Odysseus right before her eyes. Wonderstruck, 
she hailed her guest with a winning flight of words: 
"Farewell, my friend! And when you are at home, 
home in your own land, remember me at times. 
Mainly to me you owe the gift of life." 

Odysseus rose to the moment deftly, gently: 
"Nausicaa, daughter of generous King Alcinous, 
may Zeus the Thunderer, Hera's husband, grant it so — 
that 1 travel home and see the dawn of my return- 
Even at home I'll pray to you as a deathless goddess 
all my days to come. You saved my life, dear girl." 

And he went and took his seat beside the king. 
By now they were serving out the portions, mixing wine, 
and the herald soon approached, leading the faithful bard 
Demodocus, prized by all the people — seated him in a chair 
amid the feasters, leaning it against a central column. 
At once alert Odysseus carved a strip of loin, 
rich and crisp with fat, from the white-tusked boar 
that still had much meat left, and called the herald over: 
"Here, herald, take this choice cut to Demodocus 
so he can eat his fill — ^with warm regards 
from a man who knows what suffering is ... 
From all who walk the earth our bards deserve 
esteem and awe, for the Muse herself has taught them 
paths of song. She loves the breed of harpers." 



The herald placed the gift in Demodocus' hands 
and the famous blind bard received it, overjoyed. 
They reached for the good things that lay outspread 
and when they 'd put aside desire for food and drink, 
Odysseus, master of many exploits, praised the singer: 
"1 respect you, Demodocus, more than any man alive — 
surely the Muse has taught you, Zeus's daughter, 
or god Apollo himself. How true to life, 
all too true ... you sing the Achaeans' fate, 
all they did and suffered, all they soldiered through, 
as if you were there yourself or heard from one who was. 
But come now, shift your ground. Sing of the wooden horse 
Epeus built with Athena's help, the cunning trap that 
good Odysseus brought one day to the heights of Troy, 
filled with fighting men who laid the city waste. 
Sing thattoT me — true to life as it deserves — 
and 1 will tell the world at once how freely 
the Muse gave youXhe gods' own gift of song." 

Stirred now by the Muse, the bard launched out 
in a fine blaze of song, starting at just the point 
where the main Achaean force, setting their camps afire, 
had boarded the oarswept ships and sailed for home 
but famed Odysseus' men already crouched in hiding — 
in the heart of Troy's assembly — dark in that horse 
the Trojans dragged themselves to the city heights. 
Now it stood there, looming ... 
and round its bulk the Trojans sat debating, 
clashing, days on end. Three plans split their ranks: 
either to hack open the hollow vault with ruthless bronze 
or haul it up to the highest ridge and pitch it down the cliffs 
or let it stand — a glorious offering made to pacify the gods — 
and that, that final plan, was bound to win the day. 
For Troy was fated to perish once the city lodged 
inside her walls the monstrous wooden horse 
where the prime of Argive power lag in wait 
with death and slaughter bearing down on Troy. 



And he sang how troops of Achaeans broke from cover, 
streaming out of the horse's hollow flanks to plunder Troy — 
he sang how left and right they ravaged the steep city, 
sang how Odysseus marched right up to Deiphobus' house 
like the god of war on attack with diehard Menelaus. 
There, he sang, Odysseus fought the grimmest fight 
he had ever braved but he won through at last, 
thanks to Athena's superhuman power. 

That was the song the famous harper sang 
but great Odysseus melted into tears, 
running down from his eyes to wet his cheeks ... 
as a woman weeps, her arms flung round her darling husband, 
a man who fell in battle, fighting for town and townsmen, 
trying to beat the day of doom from home and children. 
Seeing the man go down, dying, gasping for breath, 
she clings for dear life, screams and shrills — 
but the victors, just behind her, 
digging spear-butts into her back and shoulders, 
drag her off in bondage, yoked to hard labor, pain, 
and the most heartbreaking torment wastes her cheeks. 
So from Odysseus' eyes ran tears of heartbreak now. 
But his weeping went unmarked by all the others; 
only Alcinous, sitting close beside him, 
noticed his guest's tears, 
heard the groan in the man's labored breathing 
and said at once to the master mariners around him, 
"Hear me, my lords and captains of Phaeacia! 
Let Demodocus rest his ringing lyre now — 
this song he sings can hardly please us all. 
Ever since our meal began and the stirring bard 
launched his song, our guest has never paused 
in his tears and throbbing sorrow. 
Clearly grief has overpowered his heart. 
Break off this song! Let us a77enjoy ourselves, 
the hosts and guest together. Much the warmer way. 
All these things are performed for him, our honored guest, 
the royal send-off here and gifts we give in love. 



Treat your guest and suppliant like a brother: 

anyone with a touch of sense knows that. 

So don't be crafty now, my friend, don't hide 

the truth I'm after. Fair is fair, speak out! 

Come, tell us the name they call you there at home — 

your mother, father, townsmen, neighbors round about. 

Surely no man in the world is nameless, all told. 

Born high, born low, as soon as he sees the light 

his parents always name him, once he's born. 

And tell me your land, your people, your city too, 

so our ships can sail you home — their wits will speed them there. 

For we have no steersmen here among Phaeacia's crews 

or steering-oars that guide your common craft. 

Our ships know in a flash their mates' intentions, 

know all ports of call and all the rich green fields. 

With wings of the wind they cross the sea's huge gulfs, 

shrouded in mist and cloud — no fear in the world of foundering, 

fatal shipwreck. 

True, there's an old tale 1 heard 
my father telling once. Nausithous used to say 
that lord Poseidon was vexed with us because 
we escorted all mankind and never came to grief. 
He said that one day, as a well-built ship of ours 
sailed home on the misty sea from such a convoy, 
the god would crush it, yes, 
and pile a huge mountain round about our port. 
So the old king foretold ... And as for the god, well, 
he can do his worst or leave it quite undone, 
whatever warms his heart. 

But come, my friend, 
tell us your own story now, and tell it truly. 
Where have your rovings forced you? 
What lands of men have you seen, what sturdy towns, 
what men themselves? Who were wild, savage, lawless? 
Who were friendly to strangers, god-fearing men? Tell me, 
why do you weep and grieve so sorely when you hear 
the fate of the Argives, hear the fall of Troy? 



That is the gods' work, spinning threads of death 

through the lives of mortal men, 

and all to make a song for those to come ... 

Did one of your kinsmen die before the walls of Troy, 

some brave man — a son by marriage? father by marriage? 

Next to our own blood kin, our nearest, dearest ties. 

Or a friend perhaps, someone close to your heart, 

staunch and loyal? No less dear than a brother, 

the brother-in-arms who shares our inmost thoughts." 



 



In the One-Eyed 
Giant's Cave 



Odysseus, the great teller of tales, launched out on his story: 

"Alcinous, majesty, shining among your island people, 

what a fine thing it is to listen to such a bard 

as we have here — ^the man sings like a god. 

The crown of life, I'd say. There's nothing better 

than when deep joy holds sway throughout the realm 

and banqueters up and down the palace sit in ranks, 

enthralled to hear the bard, and before them all, the tables 

heaped with bread and meats, and drawing wine from a mixing-bowl 

the steward makes his rounds and keeps the winecups flowing. 

This, to my mind, is the best that life can offer. 

But now 

you're set on probing the bitter pains I've borne, 
so I'm to weep and grieve, it seems, still more. 
Well then, what shall 1 go through first, 
what shall 1 save for last? 



What pains — the gods have given me my share. 

Now let me begin by telling you my name ... 

so you may know it well and 1 in times to come, 

if 1 can escape the fatal day, will be your host, 

your sworn friend, though my home is far from here. 

1 am Odysseus, son of Laertes, known to the world 

for every kind of craft — my fame has reached the skies. 

Sunny Ithaca is my home. Atop her stands our seamark, 

Mount Neriton's leafy ridges shimmering in the wind. 

Around her a ring of islands circle side-by-side, 

Dulichion, Same, wooded Zacynthus too, but mine 

lies low and away, the farthest out to sea, 

rearing into the western dusk 

while the others face the east and breaking day. 

Mine is a rugged land but good for raising sons — 

and 1 myself, 1 know no sweeter sight on earth 

than a man's own native country. 

True enough. 
Calypso the lustrous goddess tried to hold me back, 
deep in her arching caverns, craving me for a husband. 
So did Circe, holding me just as warmly in her halls, 
the bewitching queen of Aeaea keen to have me too. 
But they never won the heart inside me, never. 
So nothing is as sweet as a man's own country, 
his own parents, even though he's settled down 
in some luxurious house, off in a foreign land 
and far from those who bore him. 

No more. Come, 
let me tell you about the voyage fraught with hardship 
Zeus inflicted on me, homeward bound from Troy ... 

The wind drove me out of Ilium on to Ismarus, 
the Cicones' stronghold. There 1 sacked the city, 
killed the men, but as for the wives and plunder, 
that rich haul we dragged away from the place — 
we shared it round so no one, not on my account, 
would go deprived of his fair share of spoils. 



Then I urged them to cut and run, set sail, 

but would they listen? Not those mutinous fools; 

there was too much wine to swill, too many sheep to slaughter 

down along the beach, and shambling longhorn cattle. 

And all the while the Cicones sought out other Cicones, 

called for help from their neighbors living inland: 

a larger force, and stronger soldiers too, 

skilled hands at fighting men from chariots, 

skilled, when a crisis broke, to fight on foot. 

Out of the morning mist they came against us — 

packed as the leaves and spears that flower forth in spring — 

and Zeus presented us with disaster, me and my comrades 

doomed to suffer blow on mortal blow. Lining up, 

both armies battled it out against our swift ships, 

both raked each other with hurtling bronze lances. 

Long as morning rose and the blessed day grew stronger 

we stood and fought them off, massed as they were, but then, 

when the sun wheeled past the hour for unyoking oxen, 

the Cicones broke our lines and beat us down at last. 

Out of each ship, six men-at-arms were killed; 

the rest of us rowed away from certain doom. 

From there we sailed on, glad to escape our death 
yet sick at heart for the dear companions we had lost. 
But 1 would not let our rolling ships set sail until the crews 
had raised the triple cry, saluting each poor comrade 
cut down by the fierce Cicones on that plain. 
Now Zeus who masses the stormclouds hit the fleet 
with the North Wind — 

a howling, demonic gale, shrouding over 
in thunderheads the earth and sea at once — 

and night swept down 
from the sky and the ships went plunging headlong on, 
our sails slashed to rags by the hurricane's blast! 
We struck them — cringing at death we rowed our ships 
to the nearest shoreline, pulled with all our power. 
There, for two nights, two days, we lay by, no letup, 
eating our hearts out, bent with pain and bone-tired. 



when Dawn with her lovely locks brought on the third day, 
then stepping the masts and hoisting white sails high, 
we lounged at the oarlocks, letting wind and helmsmen 
keep us true on course ... 

And now, at long last, 
1 might have reached my native land unscathed, 
but just as 1 doubled Malea's cape, a tide-rip 
and the North Wind drove me way off course, 
careering past Cythera. 

Nine whole days 
1 was borne along by rough, deadly winds 
on the fish-infested sea. Then on the tenth 
our squadron reached the land of the Lotus-eaters, 
people who eat the lotus, mellow fruit and flower. 
We disembarked on the coast, drew water there 
and crewmen snatched a meal by the swift ships. 
Once we'd had our fill of food and drink 1 sent 
a detail ahead, two picked men and a third, a runner, 
to scout out who might live there — men like us perhaps, 
who live on bread? So off they went and soon enough 
they mingled among the natives. Lotus-eaters, Lotus-eaters 
who had no notion of killing my companions, not at all, 
they simply gave them the lotus to taste instead ... 
Any crewmen who ate the lotus, the honey -sweet fruit, 
lost all desire to send a message back, much less return, 
their only wish to linger there with the Lotus-eaters, 
grazing on lotus, all memory of the journey home 
dissolved forever. But /brought them back, back 
to the hollow ships, and streaming tears — 1 forced them, 
hauled them under the rowing benches, lashed them fast 
and shouted out commands to my other, steady comrades: 
'Quick, no time to lose, embark in the racing ships!' — 
so none could eat the lotus, forget the voyage home. 
They swung aboard at once, they sat to the oars in ranks 
and in rhythm churned the water white with stroke on stroke. 

From there we sailed on, our spirits now at a low ebb, 
and reached the land of the high and mighty Cyclops, 



lawless brutes, who trust so to the everlasting gods 
they never plant with their own hands or plow the soil. 
Unsown, unplowed, the earth teems with all they need, 
wheat, barley and vines, swelled by the rains of Zeus 
to yield a big full-bodied wine from clustered grapes. 
They have no meeting place for council, no laws either, 
no, up on the mountain peaks they live in arching caverns — 
each a law to himself, ruling his wives and children, 
not a care in the world for any neighbor. 

Now, 

a level island stretches flat across the harbor, 

not close inshore to the Cyclops' coast, not too far out, 

thick with woods where the wild goats breed by hundreds. 

No trampling of men to start them from their lairs, 

no hunters roughing it out on the woody ridges, 

stalking quarry, ever raid their haven. 

No flocks browse, no plowlands roll with wheat; 

unplowed, unsown forever — empty of humankind — 

the island just feeds droves of bleating goats. 

For the Cyclops have no ships with crimson prows, 

no shipwrights there to build them good trim craft 

that could sail them out to foreign ports of call 

as most men risk the seas to trade with other men. 

Such artisans would have made this island too 

a decent place to live in ... No mean spot, 

it could bear you any crop you like in season. 

The water-meadows along the low foaming shore 

run soft and moist, and your vines would never flag. 

The land's clear for plowing. Harvest on harvest, 

a man could reap a healthy stand of grain — 

the subsoil's dark and rich. 

There's a snug deep-water harbor there, what's more, 
no need for mooring-gear, no anchor-stones to heave, 
no cables to make fast. Just beach your keels, ride out 
the days till your shipmates' spirit stirs for open sea 
and a fair wind blows. And last, at the harbor's head 
there's a spring that rushes fresh from beneath a cave 
and black poplars flourish round its mouth. 



Well, 

here we landed, and surely a god steered us in 
through the pitch-black night. 
Not that he ever showed himself, with thick fog 
swirling around the ships, the moon wrapped in clouds 
and not a glimmer stealing through that gloom. 
Not one of us glimpsed the island — scanning hard — 
or the long combers rolling us slowly toward the coast, 
not till our ships had run their keels ashore. 
Beaching our vessels smoothly, striking sail, 
the crews swung out on the low shelving sand 
and there we fell asleep, awaiting Dawn's first light. 

When young Dawn with her rose-red fingers shone once more 
we all turned out, intrigued to tour the island. 
The local nymphs, the daughters of Zeus himself, 
flushed mountain-goats so the crews could make their meal. 
Quickly we fetched our curved bows and hunting spears 
from the ships and, splitting up into three bands, 
we started shooting, and soon enough some god 
had sent us bags of game to warm our hearts. 
A dozen vessels sailed in my command 
and to each crew nine goats were shared out 
and mine alone took ten. Then all day long 
till the sun went down we sat and feasted well 
on sides of meat and rounds of heady wine. 
The good red stock in our vessels' holds 
had not run out, there was still plenty left; 
the men had carried off a generous store in jars 
when we stormed and sacked the Cicones' holy city. 
Now we stared across at the Cyclops' shore, so near 
we could even see their smoke, hear their voices, 
their bleating sheep and goats ... 
And then when the sun had set and night came on 
we lay down and slept at the water's shelving edge. 
When young Dawn with her rose-red fingers shone once more 
1 called a muster briskly, commanding all the hands. 
The rest of you stay here, my friends-in arms. 



I'll go across with my own ship and crew 
and probe the natives living over there. 
What are they — violent, savage, lawless? 
or friendly to strangers, god-fearing men?' 

With that 1 boarded ship and told the crew 
to embark at once and cast off cables quickly. 
They swung aboard, they sat to the oars in ranks 
and in rhythm churned the water white with stroke on stroke. 
But as soon as we reached the coast 1 mentioned — no long trip — 
we spied a cavern just at the shore, gaping above the surf, 
towering, overgrown with laurel. And here big flocks, 
sheep and goats, were stalled to spend the nights, 
and around its mouth a yard was walled up 
with quarried boulders sunk deep in the earth 
and enormous pines and oak-trees looming darkly ... 
Here was a giant's lair, in fact, who always pastured 
his sheepflocks far afield and never mixed with others. 
A grim loner, dead set in his own lawless ways. 
Here was a piece of work, by god, a monster 
built like no mortal who ever supped on bread, 
no, like a shaggy peak, I'd say — a man-mountain 
rearing head and shoulders over the world. 

Now then, 

1 told most of my good trusty crew to wait, 

to sit tight by the ship and guard her well 

while 1 picked out my dozen finest fighters 

and off 1 went. But 1 took a skin of wine along, 

the ruddy, irresistible wine that Maron gave me once, 

Euanthes' son, a priest of Apollo, lord of Ismarus, 

because we'd rescued him, his wife and children, 

reverent as we were; 

he lived, you see, in Apollo's holy grove. 

And so in return he gave me splendid gifts, 

he handed me seven bars of well-wrought gold, 

a mixing-bowl of solid silver, then this wine ... 

He drew it off in generous wine-jars, twelve in all, 

all unmixed — and such a bouquet, a drink fit for the gods! 



No maid or man of his household knew that secret store, 
only himself, his loving wife and a single servant. 
Whenever they 'd drink the deep-red mellow vintage, 
twenty cups of water he'd stir in one of wine 
and what an aroma wafted from the bowl — 
what magic, what a godsend — 
no joy in holding back when tJlat^Nas poured! 
Filling a great goatskin now, 1 took this wine, 
provisions too in a leather sack. A sudden foreboding 
told my righting spirit I'd soon come up against 
some giant clad in power like armor-plate — 
a savage deaf to justice, blind to law. 

Our party quickly made its way to his cave 
but we failed to find our host himself inside; 
he was off in his pasture, ranging his sleek flocks. 
So we explored his den, gazing wide-eyed at it all, 
the large flat racks loaded with drying cheeses, 
the folds crowded with young lambs and kids, 
split into three groups — here the spring-born, 
here mid-yearlings, here the fresh sucklings 
off to the side — each sort was penned apart. 
And all his vessels, pails and hammered buckets 
he used for milking, were brimming full with whey. 
From the start my comrades pressed me, pleading hard, 
'Let's make away with the cheeses, then come back — 
hurry, drive the lambs and kids from the pens 
to our swift ship, put out to sea at once!' 
But 1 would not give way — 
and how much better it would have been — 
not till 1 saw him, saw what gifts he'd give. 
But he proved no lovely sight to my companions. 

There we built a fire, set our hands on the cheeses, 
offered some to the gods and ate the bulk ourselves 
and settled down inside, awaiting his return ... 
And back he came from pasture, late in the day, 
herding his flocks home, and lugging a huge load 



of good dry logs to fuel his fire at supper. 
He flung them down in the cave — a jolting crash — 
we scuttled in panic into the deepest dark recess. 
And next he drove his sleek flocks into the open vault, 
all he'd milk at least, but he left the males outside, 
rams and billy goats out in the high- walled yard. 
Then to close his door he hoisted overhead 
a tremendous, massive slab — 
no twenty -two wagons, rugged and four-wheeled, 
could budge that boulder off the ground, 1 tell you, 
such an immense stone the monster wedged to block his cave! 
Then down he squatted to milk his sheep and bleating goats, 
each in order, and put a suckUng underneath each dam. 
And half of the fresh white milk he curdled quickly, 
set it aside in wicker racks to press for cheese, 
the other half let stand in pails and buckets, 
ready at hand to wash his supper down. 
As soon as he'd briskly finished all his chores 
he lit his fire and spied us in the blaze and 
'Strangers! 'he thundered out, 'now who are you? 
Where did you sail from, over the running sea-lanes? 
Out on a trading spree or roving the waves like pirates, 
sea-wolves raiding at will, who risk their lives 
to plunder other men?' 

The hearts inside us shook, 
terrified by his rumbling voice and monstrous hulk. 
Nevertheless 1 found the nerve to answer, firmly, 
'Men of Achaea we are and bound now from Troy! 
Driven far off course by the warring winds, 
over the vast gulf of the sea — battling home 
on a strange tack, a route that's off the map, 
and so we've come to you ... 
so it must please King Zeus's plotting heart. 
We're glad to say we're men of Atrides Agamemnon, 
whose fame is the proudest thing on earth these days, 
so great a city he sacked, such multitudes he killed! 
But since we've chanced on you, we're at your knees 
in hopes of a warm welcome, even a guest-gift. 



the sort that hosts give strangers. That's the custom. 
Respect the gods, my friend. We're suppliants — at your mercy! 
Zeus of the Strangers guards all guests and suppliants: 
strangers are sacred — Zeus will avenge their rights!' 

'Stranger/ he grumbled back from his brutal heart, 
'you must be a fool, stranger, or come from nowhere, 
telling me to fear the gods or avoid their wrath! 
We Cyclops never blink at Zeus and Zeus's shield 
of storm and thunder, or any other blessed god — 
we've got more force by far. 
I'd never spare you in fear of Zeus's hatred, 
you or your comrades here, unless 1 had the urge. 
But tell me, where did you moor your sturdy ship 
when you arrived? Up the coast or close in? 
I'd just like to know.' 

So he laid his trap 
but he never caught me, no, wise to the world 
1 shot back in my crafty way, 'My ship? 
Poseidon god of the earthquake smashed my ship, 
he drove it against the rocks at your island's far cape, 
dashed it against a cliff as the winds rode us in. 
1 and the men you see escaped a sudden death.' 

Not a word in reply to that, the ruthless brute. 
Lurching up, he lunged out with his hands toward my men 
and snatching two at once, rapping them on the ground 
he knocked them dead like pups — 
their brains gushed out all over, soaked the floor — 
and ripping them limb from limb to fbc his meal 
he bolted them down like a mountain-lion, left no scrap, 
devoured entrails, flesh and bones, marrow and all! 
We flung our arms to Zeus, we wept and cried aloud, 
looking on at his grisly work — paralyzed, appalled. 
But once the Cyclops had stuffed his enormous gut 
with human flesh, washing it down with raw milk, 
he slept in his cave, stretched out along his flocks. 
And 1 with my fighting heart, 1 thought at first 



to steal up to him, draw the sharp sword at my hip 

and stab his chest where the midriff packs the liver — 

1 groped for the fatal spot but a fresh thought held me back. 

There at a stroke we'd finish off ourselves as well — 

how could tvewith our bare hands heave back 

that slab he set to block his cavern's gaping maw? 

So we lay there groaning, waiting Dawn's first light. 

When young Dawn with her rose-red fingers shone once more 
the monster relit his fire and milked his handsome ewes, 
each in order, putting a suckling underneath each dam, 
and as soon as he'd briskly finished all his chores 
he snatched up two more men and fixed his meal. 
Well-fed, he drove his fat sheep from the cave, 
lightly lifting the huge doorslab up and away, 
then slipped it back in place 
as a hunter flips the lid of his quiver shut. 
Piercing whistles — turning his flocks to the hills 
he left me there, the heart inside me brooding on revenge: 
how could 1 pay him back? would Athena give me glory? 
Here was the plan that struck my mind as best ... 
the Cyclops' great club: there it lay by the pens, 
olivewood, full of sap. He'd lopped it off to brandish 
once it dried. Looking it over, we judged it big enough 
to be the mast of a pitch-black ship with her twenty oars, 
a freighter broad in the beam that plows through miles of sea — 
so long, so thick it bulked before our eyes. Well, 
flanking it now, 1 chopped off a fathom's length, 
pushed it to comrades, told them to plane it down, 
and they made the club smooth as 1 bent and shaved 
the tip to a stabbing point. 1 turned it over 
the blazing fire to char it good and hard, 
then hid it well, buried deep under the dung 
that littered the cavern's floor in thick wet clumps. 
And now 1 ordered my shipmates all to cast lots — 
who'd brave it out with me 
to hoist our stake and grind it into his eye 
when sleep had overcome him? Luck of the draw: 



I got the very ones I would have picked myself, 
four good men, and 1 in the lead made five ... 

Nightfall brought him back, herding his woolly sheep 
and he quickly drove the sleek flock into the vaulted cavern, 
rams and all — none left outside in the walled yard — 
his own idea, perhaps, or a god led him on. 
Then he hoisted the huge slab to block the door 
and squatted to milk his sheep and bleating goats, 
each in order, putting a suckling underneath each dam, 
and as soon as he'd briskly finished all his chores 
he snatched up two more men and fixed his meal. 
But this time 1 lifted a carved wooden bowl, 
brimful of my ruddy wine, 
and went right up to the Cyclops, enticing, 
'Here, Cyclops, try this wine — to top off 
the banquet of human flesh you've bolted down! 
Judge for yourself what stock our ship had stored. 
1 brought it here to make you a fine libation, 
hoping you would pity me, Cyclops, send me home, 
but your rages are insufferable. You barbarian — 
how can any man on earth come visit you after this? 
What you've done outrages all that's right!' 

At that he seized the bowl and tossed it off 
and the heady wine pleased him immensely. 'More' — 
he demanded a second bowl — 'a hearty helping! 
And tell me your name now, quickly, 
so 1 can hand my guest a gift to warm Azs heart. 
Our soil yields the Cyclops powerful, full-bodied wine 
and the rains from Zeus build its strength. But this, 
this is nectar, ambrosia — this flows from heaven!' 

So he declared. 1 poured him another fiery bowl — 
three bowls 1 brimmed and three he drank to the last drop, 
the fool, and then, when the wine was swirling round his brain, 
1 approached my host with a cordial, winning word: 
'So, you ask me the name I'm known by, Cyclops? 



I will tell you. But you must give me a guest-gift 

as you've promised. Nobody — that's my name. Nobody — 

so my mother and father call me, all my friends.' 

But he boomed back at me from his ruthless heart, 
'Nobody?\'\\ eat Nobody last of all his friends — 
I'll eat the others first! That's my gift to you!' 

With that 

he toppled over, sprawled full-length, flat on his back 
and lay there, his massive neck slumping to one side, 
and sleep that conquers all overwhelmed him now 
as wine came spurting, flooding up from his gullet 
with chunks of human flesh — he vomited, blind drunk. 
Now, at last, 1 thrust our stake in a bed of embers 
to get it red-hot and rallied all my comrades: 
Courage — no panic, no one hang back now!' 
And green as it was, just as the olive stake 
was about to catch fire — the glow terrific, yes — 
1 dragged it from the flames, my men clustering round 
as some god breathed enormous courage through us all. 
Hoisting high that olive stake with its stabbing point, 
straight into the monster's eye they rammed it hard — 
1 drove my weight on it from above and bored it home 
as a shipwright bores his beam with a shipwright's drill 
that men below, whipping the strap back and forth, whirl 
and the drill keeps twisting faster, never stopping — 
So we seized our stake with its fiery tip 
and bored it round and round in the giant's eye 
till blood came boiling up around that smoking shaft 
and the hot blast singed his brow and eyelids round the core 
and the broiling eyeball burst — 

its crackling roots blazed 

and hissed — 

as a blacksmith plunges a glowing ax or adze 
in an ice-cold bath and the metal screeches steam 
and its temper hardens — that's the iron's strength — 
so the eye of the Cyclops sizzled round that stake! 
He loosed a hideous roar, the rock walls echoed round 



and we scuttled back in terror. The monster wrenched the spike 
from his eye and out it came with a red geyser of blood — 
he flung it aside with frantic hands, and mad with pain 
he bellowed out for help from his neighbor Cyclops 
living round about in caves on windswept crags. 
Hearing his cries, they lumbered up from every side 
and hulking round his cavern, asked what ailed him: 
'What, Polyphemus, what in the world's the trouble? 
Roaring out in the godsent night to rob us of our sleep. 
Surely no one's rustling your flocks against your will — 
surely no one's trying to kill you now by fraud or force!' 

'Nobody, friends' — Polyphemus bellowed back from his cave — 
Nobody's killing me now by fraud and not by force." 

7/you're alone,' his friends boomed back at once, 
'and nobody's trying to overpower you now — look, 
it must be a plague sent here by mighty Zeus 
and there's no escape from that 
You'd better pray to your father, Lord Poseidon.' 

They lumbered off, but laughter filled my heart 
to think how nobody's name — my great cunning stroke — 
had duped them one and all. But the Cyclops there, 
still groaning, racked with agony, groped around 
for the huge slab, and heaving it from the doorway, 
down he sat in the cave's mouth, his arms spread wide, 
hoping to catch a comrade stealing out with sheep — 
such a blithering fool he took me for! 
But 1 was already plotting ... 
what was the best way out? how could 1 find 
escape from death for my crew, myself as well? 
My wits kept weaving, weaving cunning schemes — 
life at stake, monstrous death staring us in the face — 
till this plan struck my mind as best. That flock, 
those well-fed rams with their splendid thick fleece, 
sturdy, handsome beasts sporting their dark weight of wool: 



I lashed them abreast, quietly, twisting the willow-twigs 
the Cyclops slept on — giant, lawless brute — I took them 
three by three; each ram in the middle bore a man 
while the two rams either side would shield him well. 
So three beasts to bear each man, but as for myself? 
There was one bellwether ram, the prize of all the flock, 
and clutching him by his back, tucked up under 
his shaggy belly, there 1 hung, face upward, 
both hands locked in his marvelous deep fleece, 
clinging for dear life, my spirit steeled, enduring ... 
So we held on, desperate, waiting Dawn's first light. 

As soon 

as young Dawn with her rose-red fingers shone once more 
the rams went rumbling out of the cave toward pasture, 
the ewes kept bleating round the pens, unmilked, 
their udders about to burst. Their master now, 
heaving in torment, felt the back of each animal 
halting before him here, but the idiot never sensed 
my men were trussed up under their thick fleecy ribs. 
And last of them all came my great ram now, striding out, 
weighed down with his dense wool and my deep plots. 
Stroking him gently, powerful Polyphemus murmured, 
'Dear old ram, why last of the flock to quit the cave? 
In the good old days you'd never lag behind the rest — 
you with your long marching strides, first by far 
of the flock to graze the fresh young grasses, 
first by far to reach the rippling streams, 
first to turn back home, keen for your fold 
when night comes on — but now you're last of all. 
And why? Sick at heart for your master's eye 
that coward gouged out with his wicked crew? — 
only after he'd stunned my wits with wine — 
that, that Nobody ... 

who's not escaped his death, 1 swear, not yet. 

Oh if only you thought like me, had words like me 

to tell me where that scoundrel is cringing from my rage! 

I'd smash him against the ground, I'd spill his brains — 



flooding across my cave — and that would ease my heart 
of the pains that good-for-nothing Nobody made me suffer!' 

And with that threat he let my ram go free outside. 
But soon as we'd got one foot past cave and courtyard, 
first 1 loosed myself from the ram, then loosed my men, 
then quickly, glancing back again and again we drove 
our flock, good plump beasts with their long sharks, 
straight to the ship, and a welcome sight we were 
to loyal comrades — we who'd escaped our deaths — 
but for all the rest they broke down and wailed. 
1 cut it short, 1 stopped each shipmate's cries, 
my head tossing, brows frowning, silent signals 
to hurry, tumble our fleecy herd on board, 
launch out on the open sea! 
They swung aboard, they sat to the oars in rank; 
and in rhythm churned the water white with stroke on stroke. 
But once offshore as far as a man's shout can carry, 
1 called back to the Cyclops, stinging taunts: 
'So, Cyclops, no weak coward it was whose crew 
you bent to devour there in your vaulted cave — . 
you with your brute force! Your filthy crimes 
came down on your own head, you shameless cannibal, 
daring to eat your guests in your own house — 
so Zeus and the other gods have paid you back!' 

That made the rage of the monster boil over. 
Ripping off the peak of a towering crag, he heaved it 
so hard the boulder landed just in front of our dark prow 
and a huge swell reared up as the rock went plunging under — 
a tidal wave from the open sea. The sudden backwash 
drove us landward again, forcing us close inshore 
but grabbing a long pole, 1 thrust us off and away, 
tossing my head for dear life, signaling crews 
to put their backs in the oars, escape grim death. 
They threw themselves in the labor, rowed on fast 
but once we'd plowed the breakers twice as far, 
again 1 began to taunt the Cyclops — men around me 



trying to check me, calm me, left and right: 

'So headstrong — why? Why rile the beast again?' 

'That rock he flung in the sea just now, hurling our ship 
to shore once more — we thought we'd die on the spot!' 

'If he'd caught a sound from oneoi us, just a whisper, 
he would have crushed our heads and ship timbers 
with one heave of another flashing, jagged rock!' 

'Good god, the brute can throw!' 

So they begged 

but they could not bring my fighting spirit round. 
1 called back with another burst of anger, 'Cyclops — 
if any man on the face of the earth should ask you 
who blinded you, shamed you so — say Odysseus, 
raider of cities, gouged out your eye, 
Laertes' son who makes his home in Ithaca!' 

So 1 vaunted and he groaned back in answer, 
'Oh no, no — ^that prophecy years ago ... 
it all comes home to me with a vengeance now! 
We once had a prophet here, a great tall man, 
Telemus, Eurymus' son, a master at reading signs, 
who grew old in his trade among his fellow-Cyclops. 
All this, he warned me, would come to pass someday — 
that I'd be blinded here at the hands of one Odysseus. 
But 1 always looked for a handsome giant man to cross my path, 
some fighter clad in power like armor-plate, but now, 
look what a dwarf, a spineless good-for-nothing, 
stuns me with wine, then gouges out my eye! 
Come here, Odysseus, let me give you a guest-gift 
and urge Poseidon the earthquake god to speed you home. 
1 am his son and he claims to be my father, true, 
and he himself will heal me if he pleases — 
no other blessed god, no man can do the work!' 

'7/ea7you!'— 



here was my parting shot — Would to god I could strip you 
of life and breath and ship you down to the House of Death 
as surely as no one will ever heal your eye, 
not even your earthquake god himself!' 

But at that he bellowed out to lord Poseidon, 
thrusting his arms to the starry skies, and prayed, 'Hear me — 
Poseidon, god of the sea-blue mane who rocks the earth! 
If 1 really am your son and you claim to be my father — 
come, grant that Odysseus, raider of cities, 
Laertes' son who makes his home in Ithaca, 
never reaches home. Or if he's fated to see 
his people once again and reach his well-built house 
and his own native country, let him come home late 
and come a broken man — all shipmates lost, 
alone in a stranger's ship — 
and let him find a world of pain at home!' 

So he prayed 

and the god of the sea-blue mane Poseidon heard his prayer. 

The monster suddenly hoisted a boulder — far larger — 

wheeled and heaved it, putting his weight behind it, 

massive strength, and the boulder crashed close, 

landing just in the wake of our dark stern, 

just failing to graze the rudder's bladed edge. 

A huge swell reared up as the rock went plunging under, 

yes, and the tidal breaker drove us out to our island's 

far shore where all my well-decked ships lay moored, 

clustered, waiting, and huddled round them, crewmen 

sat in anguish, waiting, chafing for our return. 

We beached our vessel hard ashore on the sand, 

we swung out in the frothing surf ourselves, 

and herding Cyclops' sheep from our deep holds 

we shared them round so no one, not on my account, 

would go deprived of his fair share of spoils. 

But the splendid ram — as we meted out the flocks 

my f riends-in-arms made him my prize of honor, 

mine alone, and 1 slaughtered him on the beach 

and burnt his thighs to Cronus' mighty son. 



Zeus of the thundercloud who rules the world. 

But my sacrifices failed to move the god: 

Zeus was still obsessed with plans to destroy 

my entire oarswept fleet and loyal crew of comrades. 

Now all day long till the sun went down we sat 

and feasted on sides of meat and heady wine. 

Then when the sun had set and night came on 

we lay down and slept at the water's shelving edge. 

When young Dawn with her rose-red fingers shone once more 

1 roused the men straightway, ordering all crews 

to man the ships and cast off cables quickly. 

They swung aboard at once, they sat to the oars in ranks 

and in rhythm churned the water white with stroke on stroke. 

And from there we sailed on, glad to escape our death 

yet sick at heart for the comrades we had lost." 



BookX 



The Bewitching 
Queen of Aeaea 



"We reached the Aeolian island next, the home of Aeolus, 

Hippotas' son, beloved by the gods who never die — 

a great floating island it was, and round it all 

huge ramparts rise of indestructible bronze 

and sheer rock cliffs shoot up from sea to sky. 

The king had sired twelve children within his halls, 

six daughters and six sons in the lusty prime of youth, 

so he gave his daughters as wives to his six sons. 

Seated beside their dear father and doting mother, 

with delicacies aplenty spread before them, 

they feast on forever ... All day long 

the halls breathe the savor of roasted meats 

and echo round to the low moan of blowing pipes, 

and all night long, each one by his faithful mate, 

they sleep under soft-piled rugs on corded bedsteads. 



To this city of theirs we came, their splendid palace, 

and Aeolus hosted me one entire month, he pressed me for news 

of Troy and the Argive ships and how we sailed for home, 

and 1 told him the whole long story, first to last. 

And then, when 1 begged him to send me on my way, 

he denied me nothing, he went about my passage. 

He gave me a sack, the skin of a full-grown ox, 

binding inside the winds that howl from every quarter, 

for Zeus had made that king the master of all the winds, 

with power to calm them down or rouse them as he pleased. 

Aeolus stowed the sack inside my holds, lashed so fast 

with a burnished silver cord 

not even a slight puff could slip past that knot. 

Yet he set the West Wind free to blow us on our way 

and waft our squadron home. But his plan was bound to fail, 

yes, our own reckless folly swept us on to ruin ... 

Nine whole days we sailed, nine nights, nonstop. 
On the tenth our own land hove into sight at last — 
we were so close we could see men tending fires. 
But now an enticing sleep came on me, bone-weary 
from working the vessel's sheet myself, no letup, 
never trusting the ropes to any other mate, 
the faster to journey back to native land. 
But the crews began to mutter among themselves, 
sure 1 was hauling troves of gold and silver home, 
the gifts of open-hearted Aeolus, Hippotas' son. 
'The old story!' One man glanced at another, grumbling. 
'Look at our captain's luck — so loved by the world, 
so prized at every landfall, every port of call.' 

'Heaps of lovely plunder he hauls home from Troy, 
while we who went through slogging just as hard, 
we go home empty-handed.' 

'Now this Aeolus loads him 
down with treasure. Favoritism, friend to friend!' 



'Hurry, let's see what loot is in that sack, 
how much gold and silver. Break it open — now!' 

A fatal plan, but it won my shipmates over. 
They loosed the sack and all the winds burst out 
and a sudden squall struck and swept us back to sea, 
wailing, in tears, far from our own native land. 
And 1 woke up with a start, my spirit churning — 
should 1 leap over the side and drown at once 
or grin and bear it, stay among the living? 
1 bore it all, held firm, 
hiding my face, clinging tight to the decks 
while heavy squalls blasted our squadron back 
again to Aeolus' island, shipmates groaning hard. 

We disembarked on the coast, drew water there 
and crewmen snatched a meal by the swift ships. 
Once we'd had our fill of food and drink 
1 took a shipmate along with me, a herald too, 
and approached King Aeolus' famous halls and here 
we found him feasting beside his wife and many children. 
Reaching the doorposts at the threshold, down we sat 
but our hosts, amazed to see us, only shouted questions: 
'Back again, Odysseus — ^why? Some blustering god attacked you? 
Surely we launched you well, we sped you on your way 
to your own land and house, or any place you pleased.' 

So they taunted, and 1 replied in deep despair, 
'A mutinous crew undid me — that and a cruel sleep. 
Set it to rights, my friends. You have the power!' 

So 1 pleaded — gentle, humble appeals — 
but our hosts turned silent, hushed ... 
and the father broke forth with an ultimatum: 
'Away from my island — fast — most cursed man alive! 
It's a crime to host a man or speed him on his way 
when the blessed deathless gods despise him so. 
Crawling back like this— 



it proves the immortals hate you! Out — get out!' 

Groan as I did, his curses drove me from his halls 
and from there we pulled away with heavy hearts, 
with the crews' spirit broken under the oars' labor, 
thanks to our own folly ... no favoring wind in sight. 

Six whole days we rowed, six nights, nonstop. 
On the seventh day we raised the Laestrygonian land, 
Telepylus heights where the craggy fort of Lamus rises. 
Where shepherd calls to shepherd as one drives in his flocks 
and the other drives his out and he calls back in answer, 
where a man who never sleeps could rake in double wages, 
one for herding cattle, one for pasturing fleecy sheep, 
the nightfall and the sunrise march so close together. 
We entered a fine harbor there, all walled around 
by a great unbroken sweep of sky -scraping cliff 
and two steep headlands, fronting each other, close 
around the mouth so the passage in is cramped. 
Here the rest of my rolling squadron steered, 
right into the gaping cove and moored tightly, 
prow by prow. Never a swell there, big or small; 
a milk-white calm spreads all around the place. 
But 1 alone anchored my black ship outside, 
well clear of the harbor's jaws 
1 tied her fast to a cliff side with a cable. 
1 scaled its rock face to a lookout on its crest 
but glimpsed no trace of the work of man or beast from there; 
all 1 spied was a plume of smoke, drifting off the land. 
So 1 sent some crew ahead to learn who lived there — 
men like us perhaps, who live f?/? bread? 
Two good mates 1 chose and a third to run the news. 
They disembarked and set out on a beaten trail 
the wagons used for hauling timber down to town 
from the mountain heights above ... 
and before the walls they met a girl, drawing water, 
Antiphates' strapping daughter — king of the Laestrygonians. 



She'd come down to a clear running spring, Artacia, 

where the local people came to fill their pails. 

My shipmates clustered round her, asking questions: 

who was king of the realm? who ruled the natives here? 

She waved at once to her father's high-roofed halls. 

They entered the sumptuous palace, found his wife inside — 

a woman huge as a mountain crag who filled them all with horror. 

Straightaway she summoned royal Antiphates from assembly, 

her husband, who prepared my crew a barbarous welcome. 

Snatching one of my men, he tore him up for dinner — 

the other two sprang free and reached the ships. 

But the king let loose a howling through the town 

that brought tremendous Laestrygonians swarming up 

from every side — hundreds, not like men, like Giants' 

Down from the cliffs they flung great rocks a man could hardly hoist 

and a ghastly shattering din rose up from all the ships — 

men in their death-cries, hulls smashed to splinters — 

They speared the crews like fish 

and whisked them home to make their grisly meal. 

But while they killed them off in the harbor depths 

1 pulled the sword from beside my hip and hacked away 

at the ropes that moored my blue-prowed ship of war 

and shouted rapid orders at my shipmates: 

'Put your backs in the oars — now row or die!' 

In terror of death they ripped the swells — all as one — 

and what a joy as we darted out toward open sea, 

clear of those beetling cliffs ... my ship alone. 

But the rest went down en masse. Our squadron sank. 

From there we sailed on, glad to escape our death 
yet sick at heart for the dear companions we had lost. 
We reached the Aeaean island next, the home of Circe 
the nymph with lovely braids, an awesome power too 
who can speak with human voice, 
the true sister of murderous-minded Aeetes. 
Both were bred by the Sun who lights our lives; 
their mother was Perse, a child the Ocean bore. 
We brought our ship to port without a sound 



as a god eased her into a harbor safe and snug, 

and for two days and two nights we lay by there, 

eating our hearts out, bent with pain and bone-tired. 

When Dawn with her lovely locks brought on the third day, 

at last 1 took my spear and my sharp sword again, 

rushed up from the ship to find a lookout point, 

hoping to glimpse some sign of human labor, 

catch some human voices ... 

1 scaled a commanding crag and, scanning hard, 

1 could just make out some smoke from Circe's halls, 

drifting up from the broad terrain through brush and woods. 

Mulling it over, 1 thought I'd scout the ground — 

that fire aglow in the smoke, 1 saw it, true, 

but soon enough this seemed the better plan: 

I'd go back to shore and the swift ship first, 

feed the men, then send them out for scouting. 

1 was well on my way down, nearing our ship 

when a god took pity on me, wandering all alone; 

he sent me a big stag with high branching antlers, 

right across my path — the sun's heat forced him down 

from his forest range to drink at a river's banks — 

just bounding out of the timber when 1 hit him 

square in the backbone, halfway down the spine 

and my bronze spear went punching clean through — 

he dropped in the dust, groaning, gasping out his breath. 

Treading on him, 1 wrenched my bronze spear from the wound, 

left it there on the ground, and snapping off some twigs 

and creepers, twisted a rope about a fathom long, 

1 braided it tight, hand over hand, then lashed 

the four hocks of that magnificent beast. 

Loaded round my neck 1 lugged him toward the ship, 

trudging, propped on my spear — no way to sling him 

over a shoulder, steadying him with one free arm — 

the kill was so immense! 

1 flung him down by the hull and roused the men, 
going up to them all with a word to lift their spirits: 
'Listen to me, my comrades, brothers in hardship — 
we won't go down to the House of Death, not yet. 



not till our day arrives. Up with you, look, 
there's still some meat and drink in our good ship. 
Put our minds on food — why die of hunger here?' 

My hardy urging brought them round at once. 
Heads came up from cloaks and there by the barren sea 
they gazed at the stag, their eyes wide — my noble trophy. 
But once they'd looked their fill and warmed their hearts, 
they washed their hands and prepared a splendid meal. 
Now all day long till the sun went down we sat 
and feasted on sides of meat and seasoned wine. 
Then when the sun had set and night came on 
we lay down and slept at the water 's shelving edge. 
When young Dawn with her rose-red fingers shone once more 
1 called a muster quickly, informing all the crew, 
'Listen to me, my comrades, brothers in hardship, 
we can't tell east from west, the dawn from the dusk, 
nor where the sun that lights our lives goes under earth 
nor where it rises. We must think of a plan at once, 
some cunning stroke. 1 doubt there's one still left. 
1 scaled a commanding crag and from that height 
surveyed an entire island 
ringed like a crown by endless wastes of sea. 
But the land itself lies low, and 1 did see smoke 
drifting up from its heart through thick brush and woods. ' 

My message broke their spirit as they recalled 
the gruesome work of the Laestrygonian king Antiphates 
and the hearty cannibal Cyclops thirsting for our blood. 
They burst into cries, wailing, streaming live tears 
that gained us nothing — what good can come of grief? 

And so, numbering off my band of men-at-arms 
into two platoons, 1 assigned them each a leader: 
1 took one and lord Eurylochus the other. 
We quickly shook lots in a bronze helmet — 
the lot of brave Eurylochus leapt out first. 
So he moved off with his two and twenty comrades. 



weeping, leaving us behind in tears as well ... 

Deep in the wooded glens they came on Circe's palace 

built of dressed stone on a cleared rise of land. 

Mountain wolves and lions were roaming round the grounds — 

she'd bewitched them herself, she gave them magic drugs. 

But they wouldn't attack my men; they just came pawing 

up around them, fawning, swishing their long tails — 

eager as hounds that fawn around their master, 

coming home from a feast, 

who always brings back scraps to calm them down. 
So they came nuzzling round my men — lions, wolves 
with big powerful claws — and the men cringed in fear 
at sight of those strange, ferocious beasts ... But still 
they paused at her doors, the nymph with lovely braids, 
Circe — and deep inside they heard her singing, lifting 
her spellbinding voice as she glided back and forth 
at her great immortal loom, her enchanting web 
a shimmering glory only goddesses can weave. 
Polites, captain of armies, took command, 
the closest, most devoted man 1 had: 'Friends, 
there's someone inside, plying a great loom, 
and how she sings — enthralling! 
The whole house is echoing to her song. 
Goddess or woman — let's call out to her now!' 

So he urged and the men called out and hailed her. 
She opened her gleaming doors at once and stepped forth, 
inviting them all in, and in they went, all innocence. 
Only Eurylochus stayed behind — he sensed a trap ... 
She ushered them in to sit on high-backed chairs, 
then she mixed them a potion — cheese, barley 
and pale honey mulled in Pramnian wine — 
but into the brew she stirred her wicked drugs 
to wipe from their memories any thought of home. 
Once they'd drained the bowls she filled, suddenly 
she struck with her wand, drove them into her pigsties, 
all of them bristling into swine — ^with grunts, 
snouts — even their bodies, yes, and only 



the men's minds stayed steadfast as before. 
So off they went to their pens, sobbing, squealing 
as Circe flung them acorns, cornel nuts and mast, 
common fodder for hogs that root and roll in mud. 

Back Eurylochus ran to our swift black ship 
to tell the disaster our poor friends had faced. 
But try as he might, he couldn't get a word out. 
Numbing sorrow had stunned the man to silence — 
tears welled in his eyes, his heart possessed by grief. 
We assailed him with questions — all at our wits' end — 
till at last he could recount the fate our friends had met: 
'Off we went through the brush, captain, as you commanded. 
Deep in the wooded glens we came on Circe's palace 
built of dressed stone on a cleared rise of land. 
Someone inside was plying a great loom, 
and how she sang — in a high clear voice! 
Goddess or woman — we called out and hailed her ... 
She opened her gleaming doors at once and stepped forth, 
inviting us all in, and in we went, all innocence. 
But /stayed behind — 1 sensed a trap. Suddenly 
all vanished — blotted out — not one face showed again, 
though 1 sat there keeping watch a good long time.' 

At that report 1 slung the hefty bronze blade 
of my silver-studded sword around my shoulder, 
slung my bow on too and told our comrade, 
'Lead me back by the same way that you came. ' 
But he flung both arms around my knees and pleaded, 
begging me with his tears and winging words: 
'Don't force me back there, captain, king — 
leave me here on the spot. 
You will never return yourself, 1 swear, 
you'll never bring back a single man alive. 
Quick, cut and run with the rest of us here — 
we can still escape the fatal day!' 



But I shot back, Eurylochus, stay right here, 
eating, drinking, safe by the black ship. 
I must be off. Necessity drives me on.' 

Leaving the ship and shore, I headed inland, 
clambering up through hushed, entrancing glades until, 
as 1 was nearing the halls of Circe skilled in spells, 
approaching her palace — Hermes god of the golden wand 
crossed my path, and he looked for all the world 
like a young man sporting his first beard, 
just in the prime and warm pride of youth, 
and grasped me by the hand and asked me kindly, 
'Where are you going now, my unlucky friend — 
trekking over the hills alone in unfamiliar country? 
And your men are all in there, in Circe's palace, 
cooped like swine, hock by jowl in the sties. 
Have you come to set them free? 
Well, 1 warn you, you won't get home yourself, 
you'll stay right there, trapped with all the rest. 
But wait, 1 can save you, free you from that great danger. 
Look, here is a potent drug. Take it to Circe's halls — 
its power alone will shield you from the fatal day. 
Let me tell you of all the witch's subtle craft ... 
She'll mix you a potion, lace the brew with drugs 
but she'll be powerless to bewitch you, even so — 
this magic herb 1 give will fight her spells. 
Now here's your plan of action, step by step. 
The moment Circe strikes with her long thin wand, 
you draw your sharp sword sheathed at your hip 
and rush her fast as if to run her through! 
She'll cower in fear and coax you to her bed — 
but don't refuse the goddess' bed, not then, not if 
she's to release your friends and treat you well yourself. 
But have her swear the binding oath of the blessed gods 
she'll never plot some new intrigue to harm you, 
once you lie there naked — 
never unman you, strip away your courage!' 

With that 

the giant-killer handed over the magic herb. 



pulling it from the earth, 

and Hermes showed me all its name and nature. 

Its root is black and its flower white as milk 

and the gods call it moly. Dangerous for a mortal man 

to pluck from the soil but not for deathless gods. 

All lies within their power. 

Now Hermes went his way 
to the steep heights of Olympus, over the island's woods 
while 1, just approaching the halls of Circe, 
my heart a heaving storm at every step, 
paused at her doors, the nymph with lovely braids — 
1 stood and shouted to her there. She heard my voice, 
she opened the gleaming doors at once and stepped forth, 
inviting me in, and in 1 went, all anguish now ... 
She led me in to sit on a silver-studded chair, 
ornately carved, with a stool to rest my feet. 
In a golden bowl she mixed a potion for me to drink, 
stirring her poison in, her heart aswirl with evil. 
And then she passed it on, 1 drank it down 
but it never worked its spell — 
she struck with her wand and 'Now,' she cried, 
'off to your sty, you swine, and wallow with your friends!' 
But 1, 1 drew my sharp sword sheathed at my hip 
and rushed her fast as if to run her through — 
She screamed, slid under my blade, hugged my knees 
with a flood of warm tears and a burst of winging words: 
'Who are you? where are you from? your city? your parents? 
I'm wonderstruck — you drank my drugs, you're not bewitched! 
Never has any other man withstood my potion, never, 
once it's past his lips and he has drunk it down. 
You have a mind in you no magic can enchant! 
You must be Odysseus, man of twists and turns — 
Hermes the giant-killer, god of the golden wand, 
he always said you'd come, 

homeward bound from Troy in your swift black ship. 
Come, sheathe your sword, let's go to bed together, 
mount my bed and mix in the magic work of love — 
we'll breed deep trust between us. ' 



So she enticed 
but I fought back, still wary. 'Circe, Circe, 
how dare you tell me to treat you with any warmth? 
You who turned my men to swine in your own house and now 
you hold me here as well — teeming with treachery 
you lure me to your room to mount your bed, 
so once 1 lie there naked 
you'll unman me, strip away my courage! 
Mount your bed? Not for all the world. Not 
until you consent to swear, goddess, a binding oath 
you'll never plot some new intrigue to harm me!' 

Straightaway 
she began to swear the oath that 1 required — never, 
she'd never do me harm — and when she'd finished, 
then, at last, 1 mounted Circe's gorgeous bed ... 

At the same time her handmaids bustled through the halls, 
four in all who perform the goddess' household tasks: 
nymphs, daughters born of the springs and groves 
and the sacred rivers running down to open sea. 
One draped the chairs with fine crimson covers 
over the seats she'd spread with linen cloths below. 
A second drew up silver tables before the chairs 
and laid out golden trays to hold the bread. 
A third mulled heady, heart- warming wine 
in a silver bowl and set out golden cups. 
A fourth brought water and lit a blazing fire 
beneath a massive cauldron. The water heated soon, 
and once it reached the boil in the glowing bronze 
she eased me into a tub and bathed me from the cauldron, 
mixing the hot and cold to suit my taste, showering 
head and shoulders down until she'd washed away 
the spirit-numbing exhaustion from my body. 
The bathing finished, rubbing me sleek with oil, 
throwing warm fleece and a shirt around my shoulders, 
she led me in to sit on a silver-studded chair, 
ornately carved, with a stool to rest my feet. 
A maid brought water soon in a graceful golden pitcher 



and over a silver basin tipped it out 

so I might rinse my hands, 

then pulled a gleaming table to my side. 

A staid housekeeper brought on bread to serve me, 

appetizers aplenty too, lavish with her bounty. 

She pressed me to eat. 1 had no taste for food. 

1 just sat there, mind wandering, far away ... 

lost in grim forebodings. 

As soon as Circe saw me, 
huddled, not touching my food, immersed in sorrow, 
she sidled near with a coaxing, winged word: 
'Odysseus, why just sit there, struck dumb, 
eating your heart out, not touching food or drink? 
Suspect me of still more treachery? Nothing to fear. 
Haven't 1 just sworn my solemn, binding oath?' 

So she asked, but 1 protested, Circe — 
how could any man in his right mind endure 
the taste of food and drink before he'd freed 
his comrades-in-arms and looked them in the eyes? 
If you, you really want me to eat and drink, 
set them free, all my beloved comrades — 
let me feast my eyes.' 

So 1 demanded. 
Circe strode on through the halls and out, 
her wand held high in hand and, flinging open the pens, 
drove forth my men, who looked like full-grown swine. 
Facing her, there they stood as she went along the ranks, 
anointing them one by one with some new magic oil — 
and look, the bristles grown by the first wicked drug 
that Circe gave them slipped away from their limbs 
and they turned men again: younger than ever, 
taller by far, more handsome to the eye, and yes, 
they knew me at once and each man grasped my hands 
and a painful longing for tears overcame us all, 
a terrible sobbing echoed through the house ... 
The goddess herself was moved and, standing by me, 
warmly urged me on — a lustrous goddess now: 



'Royal son of Laertes, Odysseus, tried and true, 
go at once to your ship at the water's edge, 
haul her straight up on the shore first 
and stow your cargo and running gear in caves, 
then back you come and bring your trusty crew.' 

Her urging won my stubborn spirit over. 
Down 1 went to the swift ship at the water's edge, 
and there on the decks 1 found my loyal crew 
consumed with grief and weeping live warm tears. 
But now, as calves in stalls when cows come home, 
droves of them herded back from field to farmyard 
once they've grazed their fill — as all their young calves 
come frisking out to meet them, bucking out of their pens, 
lowing nonstop, jostling, rushing round their mothers — 
so my shipmates there at the sight of my return 
came pressing round me now, streaming tears, 
so deeply moved in their hearts they felt as if 
they'd made it back to their own land, their city, 
Ithaca's rocky soil where they were bred and reared. 
And through their tears their words went winging home: 
'You're back again, my king! How thrilled we are — 
as if we'd reached our country, Ithaca, at last! 
But come, tell us about the fate our comrades met.' 

Still I replied with a timely word of comfort: 
'Let's haul our ship straight up on the shore first 
and stow our cargo and running gear in caves. 
Then hurry, all of you, come along with me 
to see our friends in the magic halls of Circe, 
eating and drinking — ^the feast flows on forever.' 

So I said and they jumped to do my bidding. 
Only Eurylochus tried to hold my shipmates back, 
his mutinous outburst aimed at one and all: 
'Poor fools, where are we running now? 
Why are we tempting fate? — 
why stumble blindly down to Circe's halls? 



She'll turn us all into pigs or wolves or lions 
made to guard that palace of hers — by force, 1 tell you — 
just as the Cyclops trapped our comrades in his lair 
with hotheaded Odysseus right beside them all — 
thanks to this man's rashness t/iey died too!' 

So he declared and 1 had half a mind 
to draw the sharp sword from beside my hip 
and slice his head off, tumbling down in the dust, 
close kin that he was. But comrades checked me, 
each man trying to calm me, left and right: 
'Captain, we'll leave him here if you command, 
just where he is, to sit and guard the ship. 
Lead us on to the magic halls of Circe.' 

With that, 

up from the ship and shore they headed inland. 
Nor did Eurylochus malinger by the hull; 
he straggled behind the rest, 
dreading the sharp blast of my rebuke. 

All the while 

Circe had bathed my other comrades in her palace, 

caring and kindly, rubbed them sleek with oil 

and decked them out in fleecy cloaks and shirts. 

We found them all together, feasting in her halls. 

Once we had recognized each other, gazing face-to-face, 

we all broke down and wept — and the house resounded now 

and Circe the lustrous one came toward me, pleading, 

'Royal son of Laertes, Odysseus, man of action, 

no more tears now, calm these tides of sorrow. 

Well 1 know what pains you bore on the swarming sea, 

what punishment you endured from hostile men on land. 

But come now, eat your food and drink your wine 

till the same courage fills your chests, now as then, 

when you first set sail from native land, from rocky Ithaca! 

Now you are burnt-out husks, your spirits haggard, sere, 

always brooding over your wanderings long and hard, 

your hearts never lifting with any joy — 

you've suffered far too much.' 



So she enticed 
and won our battle-hardened spirits over. 
And there we sat at ease, 
day in, day out, till a year had run its course, 
feasting on sides of meat and drafts of heady wine ... 
But then, when the year was through and the seasons wheeled by 
and the months waned and the long days came round again, 
my loyal comrades took me aside and prodded, 
'Captain, this is madness! 

High time you thought of your own home at last, 

if it really z?your fate to make it back alive 

and reach your well-built house and native land.' 

Their urging brought my stubborn spirit round. 
So all that day till the sun went down we sat 
and feasted on sides of meat and heady wine. 
Then when the sun had set and night came on 
the men lay down to sleep in the shadowed halls 
but 1 went up to that luxurious bed of Circe's, 
hugged her by the knees 

and the goddess heard my winging supplication: 
'Circe, now make good a promise you gave me once — 
it's time to help me home. My heart longs to be home, 
my comrades' hearts as well. They wear me down, 
pleading with me whenever you're away.' 

So 1 pressed 
and the lustrous goddess answered me in turn: 
'Royal son of Laertes, Odysseus, old campaigner, 
stay on no more in my house against your will. 
But first another journey calls. You must travel down 
to the House of Death and the awesome one, Persephone, 
there to consult the ghost of Tiresias, seer of Thebes, 
the great blind prophet whose mind remains unshaken. 
Even in death — Persephone has given him wisdom, 
everlasting vision to him and him alone ... 
the rest of the dead are empty, flitting shades.' 



So she said and crushed the heart inside me. 
I knelt in her bed and wept. I'd no desire 
to go on living and see the rising light of day. 
But once I'd had my fill of tears and writhing there, 
at last I found the words to venture, Circe, Circe, 
who can pilot us on that journey? Who has ever 
reached the House of Death in a black ship?' 

The lustrous goddess answered, never pausing, 
'Royal son of Laertes, Odysseus, born for exploits, 
let no lack of a pilot at the helm concern you, no, 
just step your mast and spread your white sail wide — 
sit back and the North Wind will speed you on your way. 
But once your vessel has cut across the Ocean River 
you will raise a desolate coast and Persephone's Grove, 
her tall black poplars, willows whose fruit dies young. 
Beach your vessel hard by the Ocean's churning shore 
and make your own way down to the moldering House of Death. 
And there into Acheron, the Flood of Grief, two rivers flow, 
the torrent River of Fire, the wailing River of Tears 
that branches off from Styx, the Stream of Hate, 
and a stark crag looms 

where the two rivers thunder down and meet. 
Once there, go forward, hero. Do as 1 say now. 
Dig a trench of about a forearm's depth and length 
and around it pour libations out to all the dead — 
first with milk and honey, and then with mellow wine, 
then water third and last, and sprinkle glistening barley 
over it all, and vow again and again to all the dead, 
to the drifting, listless spirits of their ghosts, 
that once you return to Ithaca you will slaughter 
a barren heifer in your halls, the best you have, 
and load a pyre with treasures — and to Tiresias, 
alone, apart, you will offer a sleek black ram, 
the pride of all your herds. And once your prayers 
have invoked the nations of the dead in their dim glory, 
slaughter a ram and black ewe, turning both their heads 
toward Erebus, but turn your head away, looking toward 
the Ocean River. Suddenly then the countless shades 



of the dead and gone will surge around you there. 
But order your men at once to flay the sheep 
that lie before you, killed by your ruthless blade, 
and burn them both, and then say prayers to the gods, 
to the almighty god of death and dread Persephone. 
But you — draw your sharp sword from beside your hip, 
sit down on alert there, and never let the ghosts 
of the shambling, shiftless dead come near that blood 
till you have questioned Tiresias yourself. Soon, soon 
the great seer will appear before you, captain of armies: 
he will tell you the way to go, the stages of your voyage, 
how you can cross the swarming sea and reach home at last.' 

And with those words Dawn rose on her golden throne 
and Circe dressed me quickly in sea-cloak and shirt 
while the queen slipped on a loose, glistening robe, 
filmy, a joy to the eye, and round her waist 
she ran a brocaded golden belt 
and over her head a scarf to shield her brow. 
And 1 strode on through the halls to stir my men, 
hovering over each with a winning word: 'Up now! 
No more lazing away in sleep, we must set sail — 
Queen Circe has shown the way . ' 

1 brought them round, 
my hardy friends-in-arms, but not even from there 
could 1 get them safely off without a loss ... 
There was a man, Elpenor, the youngest in our ranks, 
none too brave in battle, none too sound in mind. 
He'd strayed from his mates in Circe's magic halls 
and keen for the cool night air, 
sodden with wine he'd bedded down on her roofs. 
But roused by the shouts and tread of marching men, 
he leapt up with a start at dawn but still so dazed 
he forgot to climb back down again by the long ladder — 
headfirst from the roof he plunged, his neck snapped 
from the backbone, his soul flew down to Death. 



Once on our way, I gave the men their orders: 
'You think we are headed home, our own dear land? 
Well, Circe sets us a rather different course ... 
down to the House of Death and the awesome one, Persephone, 
there to consult the ghost of Tiresias, seer of Thebes. ' 

So 1 said, and it broke my shipmates' hearts. 
They sank down on the ground, moaning, tore their hair. 
But it gained us nothing — what good can come of grief? 

Back to the swift ship at the water's edge we went, 
our spirits deep in anguish, faces wet with tears. 
But Circe got to the dark hull before us, 
tethered a ram and black ewe close by — 
slipping past unseen. Who can glimpse a god 
who wants to be invisible gliding here and there?" 



 



The Kingdom of 
the Dead 

"Now down we came to the ship at the water's edge, 

we hauled and launched her into the sunlit breakers first, 

stepped the mast in the black craft and set our sail 

and loaded the sheep aboard, the ram and ewe, 

then we ourselves embarked, streaming tears, 

our hearts weighed down with anguish ... 

But Circe the awesome nymph with lovely braids 

who speaks with human voice, sent us a hardy shipmate, 

yes, a fresh following wind ruffling up in our wake, 

bellying out our sail to drive our blue prow on as we, 

securing the running gear from stem to stern, sat back 

while the wind and helmsman kept her true on course. 

The sail stretched taut as she cut the sea all day 

and the sun sank and the roads of the world grew dark. 



And she made the outer limits, the Ocean River's bounds 
where Cimmerian people have their homes — their realm and city 
shrouded in mist and cloud. The eye of the Sun can never 
flash his rays through the dark and bring them light, 
not when he climbs the starry skies or when he wheels 
back down from the heights to touch the earth once more — 
an endless, deadly night overhangs those wretched men. 
There, gaining that point, we beached our craft 
and herding out the sheep, we picked our way 
by the Ocean's banks until we gained the place 
that Circe made our goal. 

Here at the spot 
Perimedes and Eurylochus held the victims fast, 
and 1, drawing my sharp sword from beside my hip, 
dug a trench of about a forearm's depth and length 
and around it poured libations out to all the dead, 
first with milk and honey, and then with mellow wine, 
then water third and last, and sprinkled glistening barley 
over it all, and time and again 1 vowed to all the dead, 
to the drifting, listless spirits of their ghosts, 
that once 1 returned to Ithaca 1 would slaughter 
a barren heifer in my halls, the best 1 had, 
and load a pyre with treasures — and to Tiresias, 
alone, apart, 1 would offer a sleek black ram, 
the pride of all my herds. And once my vows 
and prayers had invoked the nations of the dead, 
1 took the victims, over the trench 1 cut their throats 
and the dark blood flowed in — and up out of Erebus they came, 
flocking toward me now, the ghosts of the dead and gone ... 
Brides and unwed youths and old men who had suffered much 
and girls with their tender hearts freshly scarred by sorrow 
and great armies of battle dead, stabbed by bronze spears, 
men of war still wrapped in bloody armor — ^thousands 
swarming around the trench from every side — 
unearthly cries — blanching terror gripped me! 
1 ordered the men at once to flay the sheep 
that lay before us, killed by my ruthless blade. 



and burn them both, and then say prayers to the gods, 
to the almighty god of death and dread Persephone. 
But I, the sharp sword drawn from beside my hip, 
sat down on alert there and never let the ghosts 
of the shambling, shiftless dead come near that blood 
till 1 had questioned Tiresias myself. 

But first 

the ghost of Elpenor, my companion, came toward me. 
He'd not been buried under the wide ways of earth, 
not yet, we'd left his body in Circe's house, 
unwept, unburied — this other labor pressed us. 
But 1 wept to see him now, pity touched my heart 
and 1 called out a winged word to him there: Elpenor, 
how did you travel down to the world of darkness? 
Faster on foot, 1 see, than 1 in my black ship.' 

My comrade groaned as he offered me an answer: 
Royal son of Laertes, Odysseus, old campaigner, 
the doom of an angry god, and god knows how much wine — 
they were my ruin, captain ... I'd bedded down 
on the roof of Circe's house but never thought 
to climb back down again by the long ladder — 
headfirst from the roof 1 plunged, my neck snapped 
from the backbone, my soul flew down to Death. Now, 
1 beg you by those you left behind, so far from here, 
your wife, your father who bred and reared you as a boy, 
and Telemachus, left at home in your halls, your only son. 
Well 1 know when you leave this lodging of the dead 
that you and your ship will put ashore again 
at the island of Aeaea — ^then and there, 
my lord, remember me, 1 beg you! Don't sail off 
and desert me, left behind unwept, unburied, don't, 
or my curse may draw god's fury on your head. 
No, burn me in full armor, all my harness, 
heap my mound by the churning gray surf — 
a man whose luck ran out — 
so even men to come will learn my story. 



Perform my rites, and plant on my tomb that oar 
I swung with mates when I rowed among the living. ' 

'All this, my unlucky friend,' 1 reassured him, 
'1 will do for you. 1 won't forget a thing.' 

So we sat 

and faced each other, trading our bleak parting words, 
1 on my side, holding my sword above the blood, 
he across from me there, my comrade's phantom 
dragging out his story. 

But look, the ghost 
of my mother came, my mother, dead and gone now ... 
Anticleia — daughter of that great heart Autolycus — 
whom 1 had left alive when 1 sailed for sacred Troy. 
1 broke into tears to see her here, but filled with pity, 
even throbbing with grief, 1 would not let her ghost 
approach the blood till 1 had questioned Tiresias myself. 

At last he came. The shade of the famous Theban prophet, 
holding a golden scepter, knew me at once and hailed me: 
'Royal son of Laertes, Odysseus, master of exploits, 
man of pain, what now, what brings you here, 
forsaking the light of day 
to see this joyless kingdom of the dead? 
Stand back from the trench — put up your sharp sword 
so 1 can drink the blood and tell you all the truth.' 

Moving back, 1 thrust my silver-studded sword 
deep in its sheath, and once he had drunk the dark blood 
the words came ringing from the prophet in his power: 
'A sweet smooth journey home, renowned Odysseus, 
that is what you seek, 

but a god will make it hard for you — 1 know — 
you will never escape the one who shakes the earth, 
quaking with anger at you still, still enraged 
because you blinded the Cyclops, his dear son. 
Even so, you and your crew may still reach home, 
suffering all the way, if you only have the power 



to curb their wild desire and curb your own, what's more, 

from the day your good trim vessel first puts in 

at Thrinacia Island, flees the cruel blue sea. 

There you will find them grazing, 

herds and fat flocks, the cattle of Helios, 

god of the sun who sees all, hears all things. 

Leave the beasts unharmed, your mind set on home, 

and you a//may still reach Ithaca — bent with hardship, 

true — but harm them in any way, and 1 can see it now: 

your ship destroyed, your men destroyed as well. 

And even if you escape, you'll come home late 

and come a broken man — all shipmates lost, 

alone in a stranger's ship — 

and you will find a world of pain at home, 

crude, arrogant men devouring all your goods, 

courting your noble wife, offering gifts to win her. 

No doubt you will pay them back in blood when you come home! 

But once you have killed those suitors in your halls — 

by stealth or in open fight with slashing bronze — 

go forth once more, you must ... 

carry your well-planed oar until you come 

to a race of people who know nothing of the sea, 

whose food is never seasoned with salt, strangers all 

to ships with their crimson prows and long slim oars, 

wings that make ships fly. And here is your sign — 

unmistakable, clear, so clear you cannot miss it: 

When another traveler falls in with you and calls 

that weight across your shoulder a fan to winnow grain, 

then plant your bladed, balanced oar in the earth 

and sacrifice fine beasts to the lord god of the sea, 

Poseidon — a ram, a bull and a ramping wild boar — 

then journey home and render noble offerings up 

to the deathless gods who rule the vaulting skies, 

to all the gods in order. 

And at last your own death will steal upon you ... 

a gentle, painless death, far from the sea it comes 

to take you down, borne down with the years in ripe old age 

with all your people there in blessed peace around you. 



All that 1 have told you will come true. ' 

'OhTiresias/ 
1 replied as the prophet finished, surely the gods 
have spun this out as fate, the gods themselves. 
But tell me one thing more, and tell me clearly. 
1 see the ghost of my long-lost mother here before me. 
Dead, crouching close to the blood in silence, 
she cannot bear to look me in the eyes — 
her own son — or speak a word to me. How, 
lord, can 1 make her know me for the man 1 am?' 

'One rule there is,' the famous seer explained, 
and simple for me to say and you to learn. 
Any one of the ghosts you let approach the blood 
will speak the truth to you. Anyone you refuse 
will turn and fade away.' 

And with those words, 
now that his prophecies had closed, the awesome shade 
of lord Tiresias strode back to the House of Death. 
But 1 kept watch there, steadfast till my mother 
approached and drank the dark, clouding blood. 
She knew me at once and wailed out in grief 
and her words came winging toward me, flying home: 
'Oh my son — what brings you down to the world 
of death and darkness? You are still alive! 
It's hard for the living to catch a glimpse of this ... 
Great rivers flow between us, terrible waters, 
the Ocean first of all — no one could ever ford 
that stream on foot, only aboard some sturdy craft. 
Have you just come from Troy, wandering long years 
with your men and ship? Not yet returned to Ithaca? 
You've still not seen your wife inside your halls?' 

'Mother,' 

1 replied, '1 had to venture down to the House of Death, 
to consult the shade of Tiresias, seer of Thebes. 
Never yet have 1 neared Achaea, never once 
set foot on native ground, 

always wandering — endless hardship from that day 



I first set sail with King Agamemnon bound for Troy, 

the stallion-land, to fight the Trojans there. 

But tell me about yourself and spare me nothing. 

What form of death overcame you, what laid you low, 

some long slow illness? Or did Artemis showering arrows 

come with her painless shafts and bring you down? 

Tell me of father, tell of the son 1 left behind: 

do my royal rights still lie in their safekeeping? 

Or does some stranger hold the throne by now 

because men think that I'll come home no more? 

Please, tell me about my wife, her turn of mind, 

her thoughts ... still standing fast beside our son, 

still guarding our great estates, secure as ever now? 

Or has she wed some other countryman at last, 

the finest prince among them?' 

'Surely, surely,' 
my noble mother answered quickly, she's still waiting 
there in your halls, poor woman, suffering so, 
her life an endless hardship like your own ... 
wasting away the nights, weeping away the days. 
No one has taken over your royal rights, not yet. 
Telemachus still holds your great estates in peace, 
he attends the public banquets shared with all, 
the feasts a man of justice should enjoy, 
for every lord invites him. As for your father, 
he keeps to his own farm — he never goes to town — 
with no bed for him there, no blankets, glossy throws; 
all winter long he sleeps in the lodge with servants, 
in the ashes by the fire, his body wrapped in rags. 
But when summer comes and the bumper crops of harvest, 
any spot on the rising ground of his vineyard rows 
he makes his bed, heaped high with fallen leaves, 
and there he lies in anguish ... 
with his old age bearing hard upon him, too, 
and his grief grows as he longs for your return. 
And 1 with the same grief, 1 died and met my fate. 
No sharp-eyed Huntress showering arrows through the halls 
approached and brought me down with painless shafts. 



nor did some hateful illness strike me, that so often 
devastates the body, drains our limbs of power. 
No, it was my longing for you, my shining Odysseus — 
you and your quickness, you and your gentle ways — 
that tore away my life that had been sweet.' 

And 1, my mind in turmoil, how 1 longed 
to embrace my mother's spirit, dead as she was! 
Three times 1 rushed toward her, desperate to hold her, 
three times she fluttered through my fingers, sifting away 
like a shadow, dissolving like a dream, and each time 
the grief cut to the heart, sharper, yes, and 1, 
1 cried out to her, words winging into the darkness: 
'Mother — why not wait for me? How 1 long to hold you! — 
so even here, in the House of Death, we can fling 
our loving arms around each other, take some joy 
in the tears that numb the heart. Or is this just 
some wraith that great Persephone sends my way 
to make me ache with sorrow all the more?' 

My noble mother answered me at once: 
'My son, my son, the unluckiest man alive! 
This is no deception sent by Queen Persephone, 
this is just the way of mortals when we die. 
Sinews no longer bind the flesh and bones together — 
the fire in all its fury burns the body down to ashes 
once life slips from the white bones, and the spirit, 
rustling, flitters away ... flown like a dream. 
But you must long for the daylight. Go, quickly. 
Remember all these things 
so one day you can tell them to your wife. ' 

And so we both confided, trading parting words, 
and there slowly came a grand array of women, 
all sent before me now by august Persephone, 
and all were wives and daughters once of princes. 
They swarmed in a flock around the dark blood 
while 1 searched for a way to question each alone. 



and the more I thought, the more this seemed the best: 
Drawing forth the long sharp sword from beside my hip, 
I would not let them drink the dark blood, all in a rush, 
and so they waited, coming forward one after another. 
Each declared her lineage, and 1 explored them all. 

And the first 1 saw there? Tyro, born of kings, 
who said her father was that great lord Salmoneus, 
said that she was the wife of Cretheus, Aeolus' son. 
And once she fell in love with the river god, Enipeus, 
far the clearest river flowing across the earth, 
and so she'd haunt Enipeus' glinting streams, 
till taking his shape one day 
the god who girds the earth and makes it tremble 
bedded her where the swirling river rushes out to sea, 
and a surging wave reared up, high as a mountain, dark, 
arching over to hide the god and mortal girl together. 
Loosing her virgin belt, he lapped her round in sleep 
and when the god had consummated his work of love 
he took her by the hand and hailed her warmly: 
'Rejoice in our love, my lady! And when this year 
has run its course you will give birth to glorious children — 
bedding down with the gods is never barren, futile — 
and you must tend them, breed and rear them well. 
Now home you go, and restrain yourself, 1 say, 
never breathe your lover's name but know — 
1 am Poseidon, god who rocks the earth!' 

With that he dove back in the heaving waves 
and she conceived for the god and bore him Pelias, Neleus, 
and both grew up to be stalwart aides of Zeus almighty, 
both men alike. Pelias lived on the plains of lolcos, 
rich in sheepflocks, Neleus lived in sandy Pylos. 
And the noble queen bore sons to Cretheus too: 
Aeson, Pheres and Amy thaon, exultant charioteer. 

And after Tyro 1 saw Asopus' daughter Antiope, 
proud she'd spent a night in the arms of Zeus himself 



and borne the god twin sons, Amphion and Zethus, 
the first to build the footings of seven-gated Thebes, 
her bastions too, for lacking ramparts none could live 
in a place so vast, so open — strong as both men were. 

And 1 saw Alcmena next, Amphitryon's wife, 
who slept in the clasp of Zeus and merged in love 
and brought forth Heracles, rugged will and lion heart. 
And 1 saw Megara too, magnanimous Creon's daughter 
wed to the stalwart Heracles, the hero never daunted. 

And 1 saw the mother of Oedipus, beautiful Epicaste. 
What a monstrous thing she did, in all innocence — 
she married her own son ... 
who'd killed his father, then he married her! 
But the gods soon made it known to all mankind. 
So he in growing pain ruled on in beloved Thebes, 
lording Cadmus' people — thanks to the gods' brutal plan — 
while she went down to Death who guards the massive gates. 
Lashing a noose to a steep rafter, there she hanged aloft, 
strangling in all her anguish, leaving her son to bear 
the world of horror a mother's Furies bring to life. 

And 1 saw magnificent Chloris, the one whom Neleus 
wooed and won with a hoard of splendid gifts, 
so dazzled by her beauty years ago ... 
the youngest daughter of lasus' son Amphion, 
the great Minyan king who ruled Orchomenos once. 
She was his queen in Pylos, she bore him shining sons, 
Nestor and Chromius, Periclymenus too, good prince. 
And after her sons she bore a daughter, majestic Pero, 
the marvel of her time, courted by all the young lords 
round about. But Neleus would not give her to any suitor, 
none but the man who might drive home the herds 
that powerful Iphiclus had stolen. Lurching, 
broad in the brow, those longhorned beasts, 
and no small task to round them up from Phylace. 



Only the valiant seer Melampus volunteered — 

would drive them home — 
but a god's iron sentence bound him fast: 
barbarous herdsmen dragged him off in chains. 
Yet when the months and days had run their course 
and the year wheeled round and the seasons came again, 
then mighty Iphiclus loosed the prophet's shackles, 
once he had told him all the gods' decrees. 
And so the will of Zeus was done at last. 

And 1 saw Leda next, Tyndareus' wife, 
who'd borne the king two sons, intrepid twins. 
Castor, breaker of horses, and the hardy boxer Polydeuces, 
both buried now in the life-giving earth though still alive. 
Even under the earth Zeus grants them that distinction: 
one day alive, the next day dead, each twin by turns, 
they both hold honors equal to the gods'. 

And 1 saw Iphimedeia next, Aloeus' wife, 
who claimed she lay in the Sea-lord's loving waves 
and gave the god two sons, but they did not live long, 
Otus staunch as a god and far-famed Ephialtes. 
They were the tallest men the fertile earth has borne, 
the handsomest too, by far, aside from renowned Orion. 
Nine yards across they measured, even at nine years old, 
nine fathoms tall they towered. They even threatened 
the deathless gods they'd storm Olympus' heights 
with the pounding rush and grinding shock of battle. 
They were wild to pile Ossa upon Olympus, then on Ossa 
Pelion dense with timber — their toeholds up the heavens. 
And they'd have won the day if they had reached peak strength 
but Apollo the son of Zeus, whom sleek-haired Leto bore, 
laid both low before their beards had sprouted, 
covering cheek and chin with a fresh crop of down. 

Phaedra and Procris too 1 saw, and lovely Ariadne, 
daughter of Minos, that harsh king. One day Theseus tried 



to spirit her off from Crete to Athens' sacred heights, 
but he got no joy from her. Artemis killed her first 
on wave-washed Dia's shores, accused by Dionysus. 

And 1 saw Clymene, Maera and loathsome Eriphyle — 
bribed with a golden necklace 
to lure her lawful husband to his death ... 
But the whole cortege 1 could never tally, never name, 
not all the daughters and wives of great men 1 saw there. 
Long before that, the godsent night would ebb away. 
But the time has come for sleep, either with friends 
aboard your swift ship or here in your own house. 
My passage home will rest with the gods and you." 

Odysseus paused ... They all fell silent, hushed, 
his story holding them spellbound down the shadowed halls 
till the white-armed queen Arete suddenly burst out, 
"Phaeacians! How does this man impress you now, 
his looks, his build, the balanced mind inside him? 
The stranger is my guest 
but each of you princes shares the honor here. 
So let's not be too hasty to send him on his way, 
and don't scrimp on his gifts. His need is great, 
great as the riches piled up in your houses, 
thanks to the gods' good will." 

Following her, 

the old revered Echeneus added his support, 
the eldest lord on the island of Phaeacia: 
"Friends, the words of our considerate queen — 
they never miss the mark or fail our expectations. 
So do as Arete says, though on Alcinous here 
depend all words and action." 

"And so it will be"— 
Alcinous stepped in grandly — "sure as 1 am alive 
and rule our island men who love their oars! 
Our guest, much as he longs for passage home, 
must stay and wait it out here till tomorrow, 
till 1 can collect his whole array of parting gifts. 



His send-off rests with every noble here 

but with me most of all: 

1 hold the reins of power in the realm. " 

Odysseus, deft and tactful, echoed back, 
"Alcinous, majesty, shining among your island people, 
if you would urge me now to stay here one whole year 
then speed me home weighed down with lordly gifts, 
I'd gladly have it so. Better by far, I'd say. 
The fuller my arms on landing there at home, 
the more respected, well-received I'd be 
by all who saw me sailing back to Ithaca." 

"Ah Odysseus, " Alcinous replied, "one look at you 
and we know that you are no one who would cheat us — 
no fraud, such as the dark soil breeds and spreads 
across the face of the earth these days. Crowds of vagabonds 
frame their lies so tightly none can test them. But you, 
what grace you give your words, and what good sense within! 
You have told your story with all a singer's skill, 
the miseries you endured, your great Achaeans too. 
But come now, tell me truly: your godlike comrades — 
did you see any heroes down in the House of Death, 
any who sailed with you and met their doom at Troy? 
The night's still young, I'd say the night is endless. 
For us in the palace now, it's hardly time for sleep. 
Keep telling us your adventures — ^they are wonderful. 
1 could hold out here till Dawn's first light 
if only you could bear, here in our halls, 
to tell the tale of all the pains you suffered. " 

So the man of countless exploits carried on: 
"Alcinous, majesty, shining among your island people, 
there is a time for many words, a time for sleep as well. 
But if you insist on hearing more, I'd never stint 
on telling my own tale and those more painful still, 
the griefs of my comrades, dead in the war's wake, 
who escaped the battle-cries of Trojan armies 



only to die in blood at journey's end — 
thanks to a vicious woman's will. 

Now then, 

no sooner had Queen Persephone driven off 

the ghosts of lovely women, scattering left and right, 

than forward marched the shade of Atreus' son Agamemnon, 

fraught with grief and flanked by all his comrades, 

troops of his men-at-arms who died beside him, 

who met their fate in lord Aegisthus' halls. 

He knew me at once, as soon as he drank the blood, 

and wailed out, shrilly; tears sprang to his eyes, 

he thrust his arms toward me, keen to embrace me there — 

no use — the great force was gone, the strength lost forever, 

now, that filled his rippling limbs in the old days. 

1 wept at the sight, my heart went out to the man, 

my words too, in a winging flight of pity: 

'Famous Atrides, lord of men Agamemnon! 

What fatal stroke of destiny brought you down? 

Wrecked in the ships when lord Poseidon roused 

some punishing blast of stormwinds, gust on gust? 

Or did ranks of enemies mow you down on land 

as you tried to raid and cut off herds and flocks 

or fought to win their city, take their women?' 

The field marshal's ghost replied at once: 
'Royal son of Laertes, Odysseus, mastermind of war, 
1 was not wrecked in the ships when lord Poseidon 
roused some punishing blast of stormwinds, gust on gust, 
nor did ranks of enemies mow me down on land — 
Aegisthus hatched my doom and my destruction, 

killed me, he with my own accursed wife ... 
he invited me to his palace, sat me down to feast 
then cut me down as a man cuts down some ox at the trough! 
So 1 died — a wretched, ignominious death — and round me 
all my comrades killed, no mercy, one after another, 
just like white-tusked boars 
butchered in some rich lord of power's halls 



for a wedding, banquet or groaning public feast. 
You in your day have witnessed hundreds slaughtered, 
killed in single combat or killed in pitched battle, true, 
but if you'd laid eyes on thisiX. would have wrenched your heart- 
how we sprawled by the mixing-bowl and loaded tables there, 
throughout the palace, the whole floor awash with blood. 
But the death-shriek of Cassandra, Priam's daughter — 
most pitiful thing 1 heard! My treacherous queen, 
Clytemnestra, killed her over my body, yes, and 1, 
lifting my fists, beat them down on the ground, 
dying, dying, writhing around the sword. 
But she, that whore, she turned her back on me, 
well on my way to Death — she even lacked the heart 
to seal my eyes with her hand or close my jaws. 

So, 

there's nothing more deadly, bestial than a woman 
set on works like these — what a monstrous thing 
she plotted, slaughtered her own lawful husband! 
Why, 1 expected, at least, some welcome home 
from all my children, all my household slaves 
when 1 came sailing back again ... But she — 
the queen hell-bent on outrage — bathes in shame 
not only herself but the whole breed of womankind, 
even the honest ones to come, forever down the years!' 

So he declared and 1 cried out, 'How terrible! 
Zeus from the very start, the thunder king 
has hated the race of Atreus with a vengeance — 
his trustiest weapon women's twisted wiles. 
What armies of us died for the sake of Helen ... 
Clytemnestra schemed your death while you were worlds away!' 

'True, true,' Agamemnon's ghost kept pressing on, 
'so even your own wife — never indulge her too far. 
Never reveal the whole truth, whatever you may know; 
just tell her a part of it, be sure to hide the rest. 
Not that you, Odysseus, will be murdered by your wife. 



She's much too steady, her feeUngs run too deep, 

Icarius' daughter Penelope, that wise woman. 

She was a young bride, I well remember ... 

we left her behind when we went off to war, 

with an infant boy she nestled at her breast. 

That boy must sit and be counted with the men now — 

happy man! His beloved father will come sailing home 

and see his son, and he will embrace his father, 

that is only right. But myv^iie — she never 

even let me feast my eyes on my own son; 

she killed me first, his father! 

1 tell you this — bear it in mind, you must — 

when you reach your homeland steer your ship 

into port in secret, never out in the open ... 

the time for trusting women's gone forever! 

Enough. Come, tell me this, and be precise. 
Have you heard news of my son? Where's he living now? 
Perhaps in Orchomenos, perhaps in sandy Pylos 
or off in the Spartan plains with Menelaus? 
He's not dead yet, my Prince Orestes, no, 
he's somewhere on the earth.' 

So he probed 

but 1 cut it short: 'Atrides, why ask me that? 
1 know nothing, whether he's dead or alive. 
It's wrong to lead you on with idle words. ' 

So we stood there, trading heartsick stories, 
deep in grief, as the tears streamed down our faces. 
But now there came the ghosts of Peleus' son Achilles, 
Patroclus, fearless Antilochus — and Great Ajax too, 
the first in stature, first in build and bearing 
of all the Argives after Peleus' matchless son. 
The ghost of the splendid runner knew me at once 
and hailed me with a flight of mournful questions: 
'Royal son of Laertes, Odysseus, man of tactics, 
reckless friend, what next? 



What greater feat can that cunning head contrive? 

What daring brought you down to the House of Death? — 

where the senseless, burnt-out wraiths of mortals make their home.' 

The voice of his spirit paused, and 1 was quick to answer: 
'Achilles, son of Peleus, greatest of the Achaeans, 
1 had to consult Tiresias, driven here by hopes 
he would help me journey home to rocky Ithaca. 
Never yet have 1 neared Achaea, never once 
set foot on native ground ... 
my life is endless trouble. 

But you, Achilles, 
there's not a man in the world more blest than you — 
there never has been, never will be one. 
Time was, when you were alive, we Argives 
honored you as a god, and now down here, 1 see, 
you lord it over the dead in all your power. 
So grieve no more at dying, great Achilles.' 

1 reassured the ghost, but he broke out, protesting, 
'No winning words about death to me, shining Odysseus! 
By god, I'd rather slave on earth for another man — 
some dirt-poor tenant farmer who scrapes to keep alive — 
than rule down here over all the breathless dead. 
But come, tell me the news about my gallant son. 
Did he make his way to the wars, 
did the boy become a champion — yes or no? 
Tell me of noble Peleus, any word you've heard — 
still holding pride of place among his Myrmidon hordes, 
or do they despise the man in Hellas and in Phthia 
because old age has lamed his arms and legs? 
For 1 no longer stand in the light of day — 
the man 1 was — comrade-in-arms to help my father 
as once 1 helped our armies, killing the best fighters 
Troy could field in the wide world up there ... 
Oh to arrive at father's house — ^the man I was, 
for one brief day — I'd make my fury and my hands. 



invincible hands, a thing of terror to all those men 

who abuse the king with force and wrest away his honor!' 

So he grieved but 1 tried to lend him heart: 
About noble Peleus 1 can tell you nothing, 
but about your own dear son, Neoptolemus, 
1 can report the whole story, as you wish. 
1 myself, in my trim ship, 1 brought him 
out of Scyros to join the Argives under arms. 
And dug in around Troy, debating battle-tactics, 
he always spoke up first, and always on the mark — 
godlike Nestor and 1 alone excelled the boy. Yes, 
and when our armies fought on the plain of Troy 
he'd never hang back with the main force of men — 
he'd always charge ahead, 
giving ground to no one in his fury, 
and scores of men he killed in bloody combat. 
How could 1 list them all, name them all, now, 
the fighting ranks he leveled, battling for the Argives? 
But what a soldier he laid low with a bronze sword: 
the hero Eurypylus, Telephus' son, and round him 
troops of his own Cetean comrades slaughtered, 
lured to war by the bribe his mother took. 
The only man 1 saw to put Eurypylus 
in the shade was Memnon, son of the Morning. 
Again, when our champions climbed inside the horse 
that Epeus built with labor, and 1 held full command 
to spring our packed ambush open or keep it sealed, 
all our lords and captains were wiping off their tears, 
knees shaking beneath each man — but not your son. 
Never once did 1 see his glowing skin go pale; 
he never flicked a tear from his cheeks, no, 
he kept on begging me there to let him burst 
from the horse, kept gripping his hilted sword, 
his heavy bronze- tipped javelin, keen to loose 
his fighting fury against the Trojans. Then, 
once we'd sacked King Priam's craggy city, 
laden with his fair share and princely prize 



he boarded his own ship, his body all unscarred. 
Not a wound from a flying spear or a sharp sword, 
cut-and-thrust close up — the common marks of war. 
Random, raging Ares plays no favorites.' 

So 1 said and 

off he went, the ghost of the great runner, Aeacus' grandson 
loping with long strides across the fields of asphodel, 
triumphant in all 1 had told him of his son, 
his gallant, glorious son. 

Now the rest of the ghosts, the dead and gone 
came swarming up around me — deep in sorrow there, 
each asking about the grief that touched him most. 
Only the ghost of Great Ajax, son of Telamon, 
kept his distance, blazing with anger at me still 
for the victory 1 had won by the ships that time 
1 pressed my claim for the arms of Prince Achilles. 
His queenly mother had set them up as prizes, 
Pallas and captive Trojans served as judges. 
Would to god I'd never won such trophies! 
All for them the earth closed over Ajax, 
that proud hero Ajax ... 
greatest in build, greatest in works of war 
of all the Argives after Peleus' matchless son. 
1 cried out to him now, 1 tried to win him over: 
'Ajax, son of noble Telamon, still determined, 
even in death, not once to forget that rage 
you train on me for those accursed arms? 
The gods set up that prize to plague the Achaeans — 
so great a tower of strength we lost when you went down! 
For your death we grieved as we did for Achilles' death — 
we grieved incessantly, true, and none's to blame 
but Zeus, who hated Achaea's fighting spearmen 
so intensely, Zeus sealed your doom. 
Come closer, king, and listen to my story. 
Conquer your rage, your blazing, headstrong pride!' 



So I cried out but Ajax answered not a word. 
He stalked off toward Erebus, into the dark 
to join the other lost, departed dead. 
Yet now, despite his anger, 
he might have spoken to me, or I to him, 
but the heart inside me stirred with some desire 
to see the ghosts of others dead and gone. 

And I saw Minos there, illustrious son of Zeus, 
firmly enthroned, holding his golden scepter, 
judging all the dead ... 

Some on their feet, some seated, all clustering 
round the king of justice, pleading for his verdicts 
reached in the House of Death with its all-embracing gates. 

1 next caught sight of Orion, that huge hunter, 
rounding up on the fields of asphodel those wild beasts 
the man in life cut down on the lonely mountain-slopes, 
brandishing in his hands the bronze-studded club 
that time can never shatter. 

1 saw Tityus too, 
son of the mighty goddess Earth — sprawling there 
on the ground, spread over nine acres — ^two vultures 
hunched on either side of him, digging into his liver, 
beaking deep in the blood-sac, and he with his frantic hands 
could never beat them off, for he had once dragged off 
the famous consort of Zeus in all her glory, 
Leto, threading her way toward Pytho's ridge, 
over the lovely dancing-rings of Panopeus. 

And 1 saw Tantalus too, bearing endless torture. 
He stood erect in a pool as the water lapped his chin — 
parched, he burned to drink, but he could not reach the surface, 
no, time and again the old man stooped, craving a sip, 
time and again the water vanished, swallowed down, 
laying bare the caked black earth at his feet — 
some spirit drank it dry. And over his head 
leafy trees dangled their fruit from high aloft, 
pomegranates and pears, and apples glowing red. 



succulent figs and olives swelling sleek and dark, 

but soon as the old man would strain to clutch them fast 

a gust would toss them up to the lowering dark clouds. 

And 1 saw Sisyphus too, bound to his own torture, 
grappling his monstrous boulder with both arms working, 
heaving, hands struggling, legs driving, he kept on 
thrusting the rock uphill toward the brink, but just 
as it teetered, set to topple over — 

time and again 
the immense weight of the thing would wheel it back and 
the ruthless boulder would bound and tumble down to the plain again — 
so once again he would heave, would struggle to thrust it up, 
sweat drenching his body, dust swirling above his head. 

And next 1 caught a glimpse of powerful Heracles — 
his ghost, 1 mean: the man himself delights 
in the grand feasts of the deathless gods on high, 
wed to Hebe, famed for her lithe, alluring ankles, 
the daughter of mighty Zeus and Hera shod in gold. 
Around him cries of the dead rang out like cries of birds, 
scattering left and right in horror as on he came like night, 
naked bow in his grip, an arrow grooved on the bowstring, 
glaring round him fiercely, forever poised to shoot. 
A terror too, that sword-belt sweeping across his chest, 
a baldric of solid gold emblazoned with awesome work ... 
bears and ramping boars and lions with wild, fiery eyes, 
and wars, routs and battles, massacres, butchered men. 
May the craftsman who forged that masterpiece — 
whose skills could conjure up a belt like that — 
never forge another! 

Heracles knew me at once, at first glance, 

and hailed me with a winging burst of pity: 

'Royal son of Laertes, Odysseus famed for exploits, 

luckless man, you too? Braving out a fate as harsh 

as the fate 1 bore, alive in the light of day? 

Son of Zeus that 1 was, my torments never ended, 

forced to slave for a man not half the man 1 was: 



he saddled me with the worst heartbreaking labors. 
Why, he sent me down here once, to retrieve the hound 
that guards the dead — no harder task for me, he thought — 
but 1 dragged the great beast up from the underworld to earth 
and Hermes and gleaming-eyed Athena blazed the way!' 

With that he turned and back he went to the House of Death 
but 1 held fast in place, hoping others might still come, 
shades of famous heroes, men who died in the old days 
and ghosts of an even older age 1 longed to see, 
Theseus and Pirithous, the gods' own radiant sons. 
But before 1 could, the dead came surging round me, 
hordes of them, thousands raising unearthly cries, 
and blanching terror gripped me — panicked now 
that Queen Persephone might send up from Death 
some monstrous head, some Gorgon's staring face! 
1 rushed back to my ship, commanded all hands 
to take to the decks and cast off cables quickly. 
They swung aboard at once, they sat to the oars in ranks 
and a strong tide of the Ocean River swept her on downstream, 
sped by our rowing first, then by a fresh fair wind." 



 



The Cattle of 
the Sun 



"Now when our ship had left the Ocean River rolling in her wake 
and launched out into open sea with its long swells to reach 
the island of Aeaea — east where the Dawn forever young 
has home and dancing-rings and the Sun his risings — 
heading in we beached our craft on the sands, 
the crews swung out on the low sloping shore 
and there we fell asleep, awaiting Dawn's first light. 

As soon as Dawn with her rose-red fingers shone again 
1 dispatched some men to Circe's halls to bring 
the dead Elpenor's body. We cut logs in haste 
and out on the island's sharpest jutting headland 
held his funeral rites in sorrow, streaming tears. 
Once we'd burned the dead man and the dead man's armor, 
heaping his grave-mound, hauling a stone that coped it well. 



we planted his balanced oar aloft to crown his tomb. 

And so we saw to his rites, each step in turn. 
Nor did our coming back from Death escape Circe — 
she hurried toward us, decked in rich regalia, 
handmaids following close with trays of bread 
and meats galore and glinting ruddy wine. 
And the lustrous goddess, standing in our midst, 
hailed us warmly: Ah my darling, reckless friends! 
You who ventured down to the House of Death alive, 
doomed to die twice over — others die just once. 
Come, take some food and drink some wine, 
rest here the livelong day 
and then, tomorrow at daybreak, you must sail. 
But 1 will set you a course and chart each seamark, 
so neither on sea nor land will some new trap 
ensnare you in trouble, make you suffer more.' 

Her foresight won our fighting spirits over. 
So all that day till the sun went down we sat 
and feasted on sides of meat and heady wine, 
and then when the sun had set and night came on 
the men lay down to sleep by the ship's stern-cables. 
But Circe, taking me by the hand, drew me away 
from all my shipmates there and sat me down 
and lying beside me probed me for details. 
1 told her the whole story, start to finish, 
then the queenly goddess laid my course: 
'Your descent to the dead is over, true, 
but listen closely to what 1 tell you now 
and god himself will bring it back to mind. 
First you will raise the island of the Sirens, 
those creatures who spellbind any man alive, 
whoever comes their way. Whoever draws too close, 
off guard, and catches the Sirens' voices in the air — 
no sailing home for him, no wife rising to meet him, 
no happy children beaming up at their father's face. 
The high, thrilling song of the Sirens will transfix him. 



lolling there in their meadow, round them heaps of corpses, 
rotting away, rags of skin shriveling on their bones ... 
Race straight past that coast! Soften some beeswax 
and stop your shipmates' ears so none can hear, 
none of the crew, but if you are bent on hearing, 
have them tie you hand and foot in the swift ship, 
erect at the mast-block, lashed by ropes to the mast 
so you can hear the Sirens' song to your heart's content. 
But if you plead, commanding your men to set you free, 
then they must lash you faster, rope on rope. 

But once your crew has rowed you past the Sirens 
a choice of routes is yours. 1 cannot advise you 
which to take, or lead you through it all — 
you must decide for yourself — 
but 1 can tell you the ways of either course. 
On one side beetling cliffs shoot up, and against them 
pound the huge roaring breakers of blue-eyed Amphitrite — 
the Clashing Rocks they're called by all the blissful gods. 
Not even birds can escape them, no, not even the doves 
that veer and fly ambrosia home to Father Zeus: 
even of those the sheer Rocks always pick off one 
and Father wings one more to keep the number up. 
No ship of men has ever approached and slipped past — 
always some disaster — big timbers and sailors' corpses 
whirled away by the waves and lethal blasts of fire. 
One ship alone, one deep-sea craft sailed clear, 
the Arffo, sung by the world, when heading home 
from Aeetes' shores. And 5Ae would have crashed 
against those giant rocks and sunk at once if Hera, 
for love of Jason, had not sped her through. 

On the other side loom two enormous crags ... 
One thrusts into the vaulting sky its jagged peak, 
hooded round with a dark cloud that never leaves — 
no clear bright air can ever bathe its crown, 
not even in summer's heat or harvest-time. 
No man on earth could scale it, mount its crest. 



not even with twenty hands and twenty feet for cUmbing, 
the rock's so smooth, like dressed and burnished stone. 
And halfway up that cliff side stands a fog-bound cavern 
gaping west toward Erebus, realm of death and darkness — 
past it, great Odysseus, you should steer your ship. 
No rugged young archer could hit that yawning cave 
with a winged arrow shot from off the decks. 
Scylla lurks inside it — the yelping horror, 
yelping, no louder than any suckling pup, 
but she's a grisly monster, 1 assure you. 
No one could look on her with any joy, 
not even a god who meets her face-to-face ... 
She has twelve legs, all writhing, dangling down 
and six long swaying necks, a hideous head on each, 
each head barbed with a triple row of fangs, thickset, 
packed tight — armed to the hilt with black death! 
Holed up in the cavern's bowels from her waist down 
she shoots out her heads, out of that terrifying pit, 
angling right from her nest, wildly sweeping the reefs 
for dolphins, dogfish or any bigger quarry she can drag 
from the thousands Amphitrite spawns in groaning seas. 
No mariners yet can boast they've raced their ship 
past Scylla's lair without some mortal blow — 
with each of her six heads she snatches up 
a man from the dark-prowed craft and whisks him off. 

The other crag is lower — you will see, Odysseus — 
though both lie side-by-side, an arrow-shot apart. 
Atop it a great fig-tree rises, shaggy with leaves; 
beneath it awesome Chary bdis gulps the dark water down. 
Three times a day she vomits it up, three times she gulps it down, 
that terror! Don't be ^Aere when the whirlpool swallows down — 
not even the earthquake god could save you from disaster. 
No, hug Scylla's crag — sail on past her — ^top speed! 
Better by far to lose six men and keep your ship 
than lose your entire crew.' 

'Yes, yes, 

but tell me the truth now, goddess,' 1 protested. 



'Deadly Charybdis — can't I possibly cut and run from her 
and still fight Scylla off when Scylla strikes my men?' 

'So stubborn!' the lovely goddess countered. 
'Hell-bent yet again on battle and feats of arms? 
Can't you bow to the deathless gods themselves? 
Scylla's no mortal, she's an immortal devastation, 
terrible, savage, wild, no fighting her, no defense — 
just flee the creature, that's the only way. 
Waste any time, arming for battle beside her rock, 
1 fear she'll lunge out again with all of her six heads 
and seize as many men. No, row for your lives, 
invoke Brute Force, 1 tell you, Scylla's mother — 
she spawned her to scourge mankind, 
she cow stop the monster's next attack! 

Then you will make the island of Thrinacia ... 
where herds of the Sungod's cattle graze, and fat sheep 
and seven herds of oxen, as many sheepflocks, rich and woolly, 
fifty head in each. No breeding swells their number, 
nor do they ever die. And goddesses herd them on, 
nymphs with glinting hair, Phaethousa, Lampetie, 
born to the Sungod Helios by radiant Neaera. 
Their queenly mother bred and reared them both, 
then settled them on the island of Thrinacia — 
their homeland seas away — 
to guard their father's sheep and longhorn cattle. 
Leave the beasts unharmed, your mind set on home, 
and you a77may still reach Ithaca — bent with hardship, 
true — but harm them in any way, and 1 can see it now: 
your ship destroyed, your men destroyed as well! 
And even if f/f7f/ escape, you'll come home late, 
all shipmates lost, and come a broken man.' 

At those words Dawn rose on her golden throne 
and lustrous Circe made her way back up the island. 
1 went straight to my ship, commanding all hands 
to take to the decks and cast off cables quickly. 



They swung aboard at once, they sat to the oars in ranks 

and in rhythm churned the water white with stroke on stroke. 

And Circe the nymph with glossy braids, the awesome one 

who speaks with human voice, sent us a hardy shipmate, 

yes, a fresh following wind ruffling up in our wake, 

bellying out our sail to drive our blue prow on as we, 

securing the running gear from stem to stern, sat back 

while the wind and helmsman kept her true on course. 

At last, and sore at heart, 1 told my shipmates, 

'Friends ... it's wrong for only one or two 

to know the revelations that lovely Circe 

made to me alone. I'll tell you all, 

so we can die with our eyes wide open now 

or escape our fate and certain death together. 

First, she warns, we must steer clear of the Sirens, 

their enchanting song, their meadow starred with flowers. 

1 alone was to hear their voices, so she said, 

but you must bind me with tight chafing ropes 

so 1 cannot move a muscle, bound to the spot, 

erect at the mast-block, lashed by ropes to the mast. 

And if 1 plead, commanding you to set me free, 

then lash me faster, rope on pressing rope.' 

So 1 informed my shipmates point by point, 
all the while our trim ship was speeding toward 
the Sirens' island, driven on by the brisk wind. 
But then — ^the wind fell in an instant, 
all glazed to a dead calm ... 
a mysterious power hushed the heaving swells. 
The oarsmen leapt to their feet, struck the sail, 
stowed it deep in the hold and sat to the oarlocks, 
thrashing with polished oars, frothing the water white. 
Now with a sharp sword 1 sliced an ample wheel of beeswax 
down into pieces, kneaded them in my two strong hands 
and the wax soon grew soft, worked by my strength 
and Helios' burning rays, the sun at high noon, 
and 1 stopped the ears of my comrades one by one. 
They bound me hand and foot in the tight ship — 



erect at the mast-block, lashed by ropes to the mast — 
and rowed and churned the whitecaps stroke on stroke. 
We were just offshore as far as a man's shout can carry, 
scudding close, when the Sirens sensed at once a ship 
was racing past and burst into their high, thrilling song: 
Come closer, famous Odysseus — ^Achaea's pride and glory — 
moor your ship on our coast so you can hear our song! 
Never has any sailor passed our shores in his black craft 
until he has heard the honeyed voices pouring from our lips, 
and once he hears to his heart's content sails on, a wiser man. 
We know all the pains that Achaeans and Trojans once endured 
on the spreading plain of Troy when the gods willed it so — 
all that comes to pass on the fertile earth, we know it all!' 

So they sent their ravishing voices out across the air 
and the heart inside me throbbed to listen longer. 
1 signaled the crew with frowns to set me free — 
they flung themselves at the oars and rowed on harder, 
Perimedes and Eurylochus springing up at once 
to bind me faster with rope on chafing rope. 
But once we'd left the Sirens fading in our wake, 
once we could hear their song no more, their urgent call — 
my steadfast crew was quick to remove the wax I'd used 
to seal their ears and loosed the bonds that lashed me. 

We'd scarcely put that island astern when suddenly 
1 saw smoke and heavy breakers, heard their booming thunder. 
The men were terrified — oarblades flew from their grip, 
clattering down to splash in the vessel's wash. 
She lay there, dead in the water ... 
no hands to tug the blades that drove her on. 
But 1 strode down the decks to rouse my crewmen, 
halting beside each one with a bracing, winning word: 
'Friends, we're hardly strangers at meeting danger — 
and this danger is no worse than what we faced 
when Cyclops penned us up in his vaulted cave 
with crushing force! But even from there my courage, 
my presence of mind and tactics saved us all. 



and we will live to remember this someday, 
1 have no doubt. Up now, follow my orders, 
all of us work as one! You men at the thwarts — 
lay on with your oars and strike the heaving swells, 
trusting that Zeus will pull us through these straits alive. 
You, helmsman, here's your order — burn it in your mind — 
the steering-oar of our rolling ship is in your hands. 
Keep her clear of that smoke and surging breakers, 
head for those crags or she'll catch you off guard, 
she'll yaw over there — you'll plunge us all in ruin!' 

So 1 shouted. They snapped to each command. 
No mention of Scylla — how to fight that nightmare? — 
for fear the men would panic, desert their oars 
and huddle down and stow themselves away. 
But now 1 cleared my mind of Circe's orders — 
cramping my style, urging me not to arm at all. 
1 donned my heroic armor, seized long spears 
in both my hands and marched out on the half-deck, 
forward, hoping from there to catch the first glimpse 
of Scylla, ghoul of the cliffs, swooping to kill my men. 
But nowhere could 1 make her out — and my eyes ached, 
scanning that mist-bound rock face top to bottom. 

Now wailing in fear, we rowed on up those straits, 
Scylla to starboard, dreaded Charybdis off to port, 
her horrible whirlpool gulping the sea-surge down, down 
but when she spewed it up — like a cauldron over a raging fire — 
all her churning depths would seethe and heave — exploding spray 
showering down to splatter" the peaks of both crags at once! 
But when she swallowed the sea-surge down her gaping maw 
the whole abyss lay bare and the rocks around her roared, 
terrible, deafening — 

bedrock showed down deep, boiling 

black with sand — 

and ashen terror gripped the men. 
But now, fearing death, all eyes fixed on Charybdis — 
now Scylla snatched six men from our hollow ship. 



the toughest, strongest hands I had, and glancing 
backward over the decks, searching for my crew 
I could see their hands and feet already hoisted, 
flailing, high, higher, over my head, look — 
wailing down at me, comrades riven in agony, 
shrieking out my name for one last time! 
Just as an angler poised on a jutting rock 
flings his treacherous bait in the offshore swell, 
whips his long rod — hook sheathed in an oxhorn lure — 
and whisks up little fish he flips on the beach-break, 
writhing, gasping out their lives ... so now they writhed, 
gasping as Scylla swung them up her cliff, and there 
at her cavern's mouth she bolted them down raw — 
screaming out, flinging their arms toward me, 
lost in that mortal struggle ... 
Of all the pitiful things I've had to witness, 
suffering, searching out the pathways of the sea, 
this wrenched my heart the most. 

But now, at last, 
putting the Rocks, Scylla and dread Charybdis far astern, 
we quickly reached the good green island of the Sun 
where Helios, lord Hyperion, keeps his fine cattle, 
broad in the brow, and flocks of purebred sheep. 
Still aboard my black ship in the open sea 
1 could hear the lowing cattle driven home, 
the bleating sheep. And 1 was struck once more 
by the words of the blind Theban prophet, Tiresias, 
and Aeaean Circe too: time and again they told me 
to shun this island of the Sun, the joy of man. 
So 1 warned my shipmates gravely, sick at heart, 
'Listen to me, my comrades, brothers in hardship, 
let me tell you the dire prophecies of Tiresias 
and Aeaean Circe too: time and again they told me 
to shun this island of the Sun, the joy of man. 
Here, they warned, the worst disaster awaits us. 
Row straight past these shores — race our black ship on!' 



So I said, and the warnings broke their hearts. 
But Eurylochus waded in at once — with mutiny on his mind: 
'You're a hard man, Odysseus. Your fighting spirit's 
stronger than ours, your stamina never fails. 
You must be made of iron head to foot. Look, 
your crew's half -dead with labor, starved for sleep, 
and you iorhid us to set foot on land, this island here, 
washed by the waves, where we might catch a decent meal again. 
Drained as we are, night falling fast, you'd have us desert 
this haven and blunder off, into the mist-bound seas? 
Out of the night come winds that shatter vessels — 
how can a man escape his headlong death 
if suddenly, out of nowhere, a cyclone hits, 
bred by the South or stormy West Wind? They 're the gales 
that tear a ship to splinters — the gods, our masters, 
willing or not, it seems. No, let's give way 
to the dark night, set out our supper here. 
Sit tight by our swift ship and then at daybreak 
board and launch her, make for open sea!' 

So Eurylochus urged, and shipmates cheered. 
Then 1 knew some power was brewing trouble for us, 
so 1 let fly with an anxious plea: 'Eurylochus, 
I'm one against all — the upper hand is yours. 
But swear me a binding oath, all here, that if 
we come on a herd of cattle or fine flock of sheep, 
not one man among us — blind in his reckless ways — 
will slaughter an ox or ram. Just eat in peace, 
content with the food immortal Circe gave us.' 

They quickly swore the oath that 1 required 
and once they had vowed they 'd never harm the herds, 
they moored our sturdy ship in the deep narrow harbor, 
close to a fresh spring, and all hands disembarked 
and adeptly set about the evening meal. 
Once they 'd put aside desire for food and drink, 
they recalled our dear companions, wept for the men 
that Scylla plucked from the hollow ship and ate alive, 
and a welcome sleep came on them in their tears. 



But then, 

at the night's third watch, the stars just wheeling down, 
Zeus who marshals the stormclouds loosed a ripping wind, 
a howling, demonic gale, shrouding over in thunderheads 
the earth and sea at once — and night swept down from the sky. 
When young Dawn with her rose-red fingers shone once more 
we hauled our craft ashore, securing her in a vaulted cave 
where nymphs have lovely dancing-rings and hold their sessions. 
There 1 called a muster, warning my shipmates yet again, 
'Friends, we've food and drink aplenty aboard the ship — 
keep hands off all these herds or we will pay the price! 
The cattle, the sleek flocks, belong to an awesome master, 
Helios, god of the sun who sees all, hears all things.' 

So 1 warned, and my headstrong men complied. 
But for one whole month the South Wind blew nonstop, 
no other wind came up, none but the South, Southeast. 
As long as our food and ruddy wine held out, the crew, 
eager to save their lives, kept hands off the herds. 
But then, when supplies aboard had all run dry, 
when the men turned to hunting, forced to range 
for quarry with twisted hooks: for fish, birds, 
anything they could lay their hands on — 
hunger racked their bellies — 1 struck inland, 
up the island, there to pray to the gods. 
If only one might show me some way home! 
Crossing into the heartland, clear of the crew, 
1 rinsed my hands in a sheltered spot, a windbreak, 
but soon as I'd prayed to all the gods who rule Olympus, 
down on my eyes they poured a sweet, sound sleep ... 
as Eury lochus opened up his fatal plan to friends: 
'Listen to me, my comrades, brothers in hardship. 
All ways of dying are hateful to us poor mortals, 
true, but to die of hunger, starve to death — 
that's the worst of all. So up with you now, 
let's drive off the pick of Helios' sleek herds, 
slaughter them to the gods who rule the skies up there. 
If we ever make it home to Ithaca, native ground. 



erect at once a glorious temple to the Sungod, 
line the walls with hoards of dazzling gifts! 
But if the Sun, inflamed for his longhorn cattle, 
means to wreck our ship and the other gods pitch in — 
I'd rather die at sea, with one deep gulp of death, 
than die by inches on this desolate island here!' 

So he urged, and shipmates cheered again. 
At once they drove off the Sungod s finest cattle — 
close at hand, not far from the blue-prowed ship they grazed, 
those splendid beasts with their broad brows and curving horns. 
Surrounding them in a ring, they lifted prayers to the gods, 
plucking fresh green leaves from a tall oak for the rite, 
since white strewing-barley was long gone in the ship. 
Once they'd prayed, slaughtered and skinned the cattle, 
they cut the thighbones out, they wrapped them round in fat, 
a double fold sliced clean and topped with strips of flesh. 
And since they had no wine to anoint the glowing victims, 
they made libations with water, broiling all the innards, 
and once they'd burned the bones and tasted the organs — 
hacked the rest into pieces, piercing them with spits. 

That moment soothing slumber fell from my eyes 
and down 1 went to our ship at the water's edge 
but on my way, nearing the long beaked craft, 
the smoky savor of roasts came floating up around me ... 
1 groaned in anguish, crying out to the deathless gods: 
'Father Zeus! the rest of you blissful gods who never die — 
you with your fatal sleep, you lulled me into disaster. 
Left on their own, look what a monstrous thing 
my crew concocted!' 

Quick as a flash 
with her flaring robes Lampetie sped the news 
to the Sun on high that we had killed his herds, 
and Helios burst out in rage to all the immortals: 
'Father Zeus! the rest of you blissful gods who never die — 
punish them all, that crew of Laertes' son Odysseus — 
what an outrage! They, they killed my cattle. 



the great joy of my heart ... day in, day out, 

when I climbed the starry skies and when I wheeled 

back down from the heights to touch the earth once more. 

Unless they pay me back in blood for the butchery of my herds, 

down 1 go to the House of Death and blaze among the dead!' 

But Zeus who marshals the thunderheads insisted. 
Sun, you keep on shining among the deathless gods 
and mortal men across the good green earth. 
And as for the guilty ones, why, soon enough 
on the wine-dark sea I'll hit their racing ship 
with a white-hot bolt, I'll tear it into splinters.' 

— Or so 1 heard from the lovely nymph Calypso, 
who heard it herself, she said, from Hermes, god of guides. 

As soon as 1 reached our ship at the water's edge 
1 took the men to task, upbraiding each in turn, 
but how to set things right? We couldn't find a way. 
The cattle were dead already ... 
and the gods soon showed us all some fateful signs — 
the hides began to crawl, the meat, both raw and roasted, 
bellowed out on the spits, and we heard a noise 
like the moan of lowing oxen. 

Yet six more days 
my eager companions feasted on the cattle of the Sun, 
the pick of the herds they'd driven off, but then, 
when Cronian Zeus brought on the seventh day, 
the wind in its ceaseless raging dropped at last, 
and stepping the mast at once, hoisting the white sail 
we boarded ship and launched her, made for open sea. 

But once we'd left that island in our wake — 
no land at all in sight, nothing but sea and sky — 
then Zeus the son of Cronus mounted a thunderhead 
above our hollow ship and the deep went black beneath it. 
Nor did the craft scud on much longer. All of a sudden 
killer-squalls attacked us, screaming out of the west. 



a murderous blast shearing the two forestays off 
so the mast toppled backward, its running tackle spilling 
into the bilge. The mast itself went crashing into the stern, 
it struck the helmsman's head and crushed his skull to pulp 
and down from his deck the man flipped like a diver — 
his hardy life spirit left his bones behind. 
Then, then in the same breath Zeus hit the craft 
with a lightning-bolt and thunder. Round she spun, 
reeling under the impact, filled with reeking brimstone, 
shipmates pitching out of her, bobbing round like seahawks 
swept along by the whitecaps past the trim black hull — 
and the god cut short their journey home forever. 

But 1 went lurching along our battered hulk 
till the sea-surge ripped the plankings from the keel 
and the waves swirled it away, stripped bare, and snapped 
the mast from the decks — but a backstay made of buU's-hide 
still held fast, and with this 1 lashed the mast and keel 
together, made them one, riding my makeshift raft 
as the wretched galewinds bore me on and on. 

At last the West Wind quit its wild rage 
but the South came on at once to hound me even more, 
making me double back my route toward cruel Charybdis. 
All night long 1 was rushed back, and then at break of day 
1 reached the crag of Scylla and dire Charybdis' vortex 
right when the dreadful whirlpool gulped the salt sea down. 
But heaving myself aloft to clutch at the fig-tree's height, 
like a bat 1 clung to its trunk for dear life — not a chance 
for a good firm foothold there, no clambering up it either, 
the roots too far to reach, the boughs too high overhead, 
huge swaying branches that overshadowed Charybdis. 
But 1 held on, dead set ... waiting for her 
to vomit my mast and keel back up again — 
Oh how 1 ached for both! and back they came, 
late but at last, at just the hour a judge at court, 
who's settled the countless suits of brash young claimants, 
rises, the day 's work done, and turns home for supper — 



that's when the timbers reared back up from Charybdis. 
I let go — I plunged with my hands and feet flailing, 
crashing into the waves beside those great beams 
and scrambling aboard them fast 
1 rowed hard with my hands right through the straits ... 
And the father of men and gods did not let Scylla see me, 
else I'd have died on the spot — no escape from death. 

1 drifted along nine days. On the tenth, at night, 
the gods cast me up on Ogygia, Calypso's island, 
home of the dangerous nymph with glossy braids 
who speaks with human voice, and she took me in, 
she loved me ... Why cover the same ground again? 
Just yesterday, here at hall, 1 told you all the rest, 
you and your gracious wife. It goes against my grain 
to repeat a tale told once, and told so clearly." 



 



Ithaca at Last 



His tale was over now. The Phaeacians all fell silent, hushed, 
his story holding them spellbound down the shadowed halls 
until Alcinous found the poise to say, "Odysseus, 
now that you have come to my bronze-floored house, 
my vaulted roofs, 1 know you won't be driven 
off your course, nothing can hold you back — 
however much you've suffered, you'll sail home. 
Here, friends, here's a command for one and all, 
you who frequent my palace day and night and drink 
the shining wine of kings and enjoy the harper's songs. 
The robes and hammered gold and a haul of other gifts 
you lords of our island council brought our guest — 
all lie packed in his polished sea-chest now. Come, 
each of us add a sumptuous tripod, add a cauldron! 



Then recover our costs with levies on the people: 
it's hard to afford such bounty man by man. " 

The king's instructions met with warm applause 
and home they went to sleep, each in his own house. 
When young Dawn with her rose-red fingers shone once more 
they hurried down to the ship with handsome bronze gifts, 
and striding along the decks, the ardent King Alcinous 
stowed them under the benches, shipshape, so nothing 
could foul the crewmen tugging at their oars. 
Then back the party went to Alcinous' house 
and shared a royal feast. 

The majestic king 
slaughtered an ox for them to Cronus' mighty son, 
Zeus of the thundercloud, whose power rules the world. 
They burned the thighs and fell to the lordly banquet, 
reveling there, while in their midst the inspired bard 
struck up a song, Demodocus, prized by all the people. 
True, but time and again Odysseus turned his face 
toward the radiant sun, anxious for it to set, 
yearning now to be gone and home once more ... 
As a man aches for his evening meal when all day long 
his brace of wine-dark oxen have dragged the bolted plowshare 
down a fallow field — how welcome the setting sun to him, 
the going home to supper, yes, though his knees buckle, 
struggling home at last. So welcome now to Odysseus 
the setting light of day, and he lost no time 
as he pressed Phaeacia's men who love their oars, 
addressing his host, Alcinous, first and foremost: 
"Alcinous, majesty, shining among your island people, 
make your libations, launch me safely on my way — 
to one and all, farewell! 
All is now made good, my heart's desire, 
your convoy home, your precious, loving gifts, 
and may the gods of Olympus bless them for me! 
May 1 find an unswerving wife when 1 reach home, 
and loved ones hale, unharmed! And you, my friends 



remaining here in your kingdom now, may you delight 
in your loyal wives and children! May the gods 
rain down all kinds of fortune on your lives, 
misfortune never harbor in your homeland!" 

All burst into applause, urging passage home 
for their parting guest, his farewell rang so true. 
Hallowed King Alcinous briskly called his herald: 
"Come, Pontonous! Mix the wine in the bowl, 
pour rounds to all our banqueters in the house, 
so we, with a prayer to mighty Zeus the Father, 
can sail our new friend home to native land." 

Pontonous mixed the heady, honeyed wine 
and hovering closely, poured full rounds for all. 
And from where they sat they tipped libations out 
to the happy gods who rule the vaulting skies. 
Then King Odysseus rose up from his seat 
and placing his two-eared cup in Arete 's hands, 
addressed the queen with parting wishes on the wing: 
"Your health, my queen, through all your days to come — 
until old age and death, that visit all mankind, 
pay you a visit too. Now 1 am on my way, 
but you, may you take joy in this house of yours, 
in your children, your people, in Alcinous the king!" 

With that the great Odysseus strode across the threshold. 
And King Alcinous sent the herald off with the guest 
to lead him down to the swift ship and foaming surf. 
And Arete sent her serving-women, one to carry 
a sea-cloak, washed and fresh, a shirt as well, 
another assigned to bear the sturdy chest 
and a third to take the bread and ruddy wine. 

When they reached the ship at the water's edge 
the royal escorts took charge of the gifts at once 
and stores of food and wine, stowed them deep in the holds, 
and then for their guest they spread out rug and sheets 



on the half -deck, clear astern on the ship's hull 

so he might sleep there soundly, undisturbed. 

And last, Odysseus climbed aboard himself 

and down he lay, all quiet, 

as crewmen sat to the oarlocks, each in line. 

They slipped the cable free of the drilled stone post 

and soon as they swung back and the blades tossed up the spray 

an irresistible sleep fell deeply on his eyes, the sweetest, 

soundest oblivion, still as the sleep of death itself ... 

And the ship like a four-horse team careering down the plain, 

all breaking as one with the whiplash cracking smartly, 

leaping with hoofs high to run the course in no time — 

so the stern hove high and plunged with the seething rollers 

crashing dark in her wake as on she surged unwavering, 

never flagging, no, not even a darting hawk, 

the quickest thing on wings, could keep her pace 

as on she ran, cutting the swells at top speed, 

bearing a man equipped with the gods' own wisdom, 

one who had suffered twenty years of torment, sick at heart, 

cleaving his way through wars of men and pounding waves at sea 

but now he slept in peace, the memory of his struggles 

laid to rest. 

And then, that hour the star rose up, 
the clearest, brightest star, that always heralds 
the newborn light of day, the deep-sea-going ship 
made landfall on the island ... Ithaca, at last. 

There on the coast a haven lies, named for Phorcys, 
the old god of the deep — with two jutting headlands, 
sheared off at the seaward side but shelving toward the bay, 
that break the great waves whipped by the gales outside 
so within the harbor ships can ride unmoored 
whenever they come in mooring range of shore. 
At the harbor's head a branching olive stands 
with a welcome cave nearby it, dank with sea-mist, 
sacred to nymphs of the springs we call the Naiads. 
There are mixing-bowls inside and double-handled jars, 
crafted of stone, and bees store up their honey in the hollows. 



There are long stone looms as well, where the nymphs weave out 

their webs from clouds of sea-blue wool — a marvelous sight — 

and a wellspring flows forever. The cave has two ways in, 

one facing the North Wind, a pathway down for mortals; 

the other, facing the South, belongs to the gods, 

no man may go that way ... 

it is the path for all the deathless powers. 

Here at this bay the Phaeacian crew put in — 
they 'd known it long before — driving the ship so hard 
she ran up onto the beach for a good half her length, 
such way the oarsmen's brawny arms had made. 
Up from the benches, swinging down to land, 
first they lifted Odysseus off the decks — 
linen and lustrous carpet too — and laid him 
down on the sand asleep, still dead to the world, 
then hoisted out the treasures proud Phaeacians, 
urged by open-hearted Pallas, had lavished on him, 
setting out for home. They heaped them all 
by the olive's trunk, in a neat pile, clear 
of the road for fear some passerby might spot 
and steal Odysseus' hoard before he could awaken. 
Then pushing off, they pulled for home themselves. 

But now Poseidon, god of the earthquake, never once 
forgetting the first threats he leveled at the hero, 
probed almighty Zeus to learn his plans in full: 
"Zeus, Father, 1 will lose all my honor now 
among the immortals, now there are mortal men 
who show me no respect — Phaeacians, too, 
born of my own loins! 1 said myself 
that Odysseus would suffer long and hard 
before he made it home, but 1 never dreamed 
of blocking his return, not absolutely at least, 
once youhadi pledged your word and bowed your head. 
But now they've swept him across the sea in their swift ship, 
they've set him down in Ithaca, sound asleep, and loaded the man 
with boundless gifts — bronze and hoards of gold and robes — 



aye, more plunder than he could ever have won from Troy 
if Odysseus had returned intact with his fair share!" 

"Incredible, " Zeus who marshals the thunderheads replied. 
"Earth-shaker, you with your massive power, why moaning so? 
The gods don't disrespect you. What a stir there'd be 
if they flung abuse at the oldest, noblest of them all. 
Those mortals? If any man, so lost in his strength 
and prowess, pays you no respect— just pay him back. 
The power is always yours. 
Do what you like. Whatever warms your heart." 

"King of the dark cloud," the earthquake god agreed, 
"I'd like to avenge myself at once, as you advise, 
but I've always feared your wrath and shied away. 
But now I'll crush that fine Phaeacian cutter 
out on the misty sea, now on her homeward run 
from the latest convoy. They will learn at last 
to cease and desist from escorting every man alive — 
I'll pile a huge mountain round about their port!" 

"Wait, dear brother," Zeus who collects the clouds 
had second thoughts. "Here's what seems best to me. 
As the people all lean down from the city heights 
to watch her speeding home, strike her into a rock 
that looks like a racing vessel, just offshore — 
amaze all men with a marvel for the ages. 
Then pile your huge mountain round about their port." 

Hearing ^Aa^ from Zeus, the god of the earthquake 
sped to Scheria now, the Phaeacians' island home, 
and waited there till the ship came sweeping in, 
scudding lightly along — and surging close abreast, 
the earthquake god with one flat stroke of his hand 
struck her to stone, rooted her to the ocean floor 
and made for open sea. 

The Phaeacians, aghast, 
those lords of the long oars, the master mariners 



traded startled glances, sudden outcries: 
"Look — who's pinned our swift ship to the sea?" 

"Just racing for home!" 

"Just hove into plain view!" 

They might well wonder, blind to what had happened, 
till Alcinous rose and made things all too clear: 
"Oh no — my father's prophecy years ago ... 
it all comes home to me with a vengeance now! 
He'd say Poseidon was vexed with us because 
we escorted all mankind and never came to grief. 
He said that one day, as a well-built ship of ours 
sailed home on the misty sea from such a convoy, 
the god would crush it, yes, 
and pile a huge mountain round about our port. 
So the old king foretold. Now, look, it all comes true! 
Hurry, friends, do as 1 say, let us all comply: 
stop our convoys home for every castaway 
chancing on our city! As for Poseidon, 
sacrifice twelve bulls to the god at once — 
the pick of the herds. Perhaps he'll pity us, 
pile no looming mountain ridge around our port." 

The people, terrified, prepared the bulls at once. 
So all of Phaeacia's island lords and captains, 
milling round the altar, lifted prayers 
to Poseidon, master of the sea ... 

That very moment 
great Odysseus woke from sleep on native ground at last — 
he'd been away for years — but failed to know the land, 
for the goddess Pallas Athena, Zeus's daughter, 
showered mist over all, so under cover 
she might change his appearance head to foot 
as she told him every peril he'd meet at home — 
keep him from being known by wife, townsmen, friends, 
till the suitors paid the price for all their outrage. 
And so to the king himself all Ithaca looked strange ... 



the winding beaten paths, the coves where ships can ride, 

the steep rock face of the cliffs and the tall leafy trees. 

He sprang to his feet and, scanning his own native country, 

groaned, slapped his thighs with his flat palms 

and Odysseus cried in anguish: 

"Man of misery, whose land have 1 lit on now? 

What arfthey here — violent, savage, lawless? 

or friendly to strangers, god-fearing men? 

Where can 1 take this heap of treasure now 

and where in the world do 1 wander off myself? 

If only the trove had stayed among the Phaeacians there 

and 1 had made my way to some other mighty king 

who would have hosted me well and sent me home! 

But now 1 don't know where to stow all this, 

and 1 can't leave it here, inviting any bandit 

to rob me blind. 

So damn those lords and captains, 
those Phaeacians! Not entirely honest or upright, were they? 
Sweeping me off to this, this no-man's-land, and they, 
they swore they'd sail me home to sunny Ithaca — ^well, 
they never kept their word. Zeus of the Suppliants 
pay them back — he keeps an eye on the world of men 
and punishes all transgressors! 

Come, quickly, 

I'll inspect my treasure and count it up myself. 
Did they make off with anything in their ship?" 

With that he counted up the gorgeous tripods, 
cauldrons, bars of gold and the lovely woven robes. 
Not a stitch was missing from the lot. But still 
he wept for his native country, trailing down the shore 
where the wash of sea on shingle ebbs and flows, 
his homesick heart in turmoil. 
But now Athena appeared and came toward him. 
She looked like a young man ... a shepherd boy 
yet elegant too, with all the gifts that grace the sons of kings, 
with a well-cut cloak falling in folds across her shoulders, 
sandals under her shining feet, a hunting spear in hand. 



Odysseus, overjoyed at the sight, went up to meet her, 

joining her now with salutations on the wing: 

"Greetings, friend! Since you are the first 

I've come on in this harbor, treat me kindly — 

no cruelty, please. Save these treasures, 

save me too. 1 pray to you like a god, 

1 fall before your knees and ask your mercy! 

And tell me this for a fact — 1 need to know — 

where on earth am I? what land? who lives here? 

Is it one of the sunny islands or some jutting shore 

of the good green mainland slanting down to sea?" 

Athena answered, her eyes brightening now, 
"You must be a fool, stranger, or come from nowhere, 
if you really have to ask what land this is. 
Trust me, it's not so nameless after all. 
It's known the world around, 
to all who live to the east and rising sun 
and to all who face the western mists and darkness. 
It's a rugged land, too cramped for driving horses, 
but though it's far from broad, it's hardly poor. 
There's plenty of grain for bread, grapes for wine, 
the rains never fail and the dewf all's healthy. 
Good country for goats, good for cattle too — 
there's stand on stand of timber 
and water runs in streambeds through the year. 

So, 

stranger, the name of Ithaca's reached as far as Troy, 
and Troy, they say, is a long hard sail from Greece." 

Ithaca... Heart racing, Odysseus that great exile 
filled with joy to hear Athena, daughter of storming Zeus, 
pronounce that name. He stood on native ground at last 
and he replied with a winging word to Pallas, 
not with a word of truth — he choked it back, 
always invoking the cunning in his heart: 
"Ithaca ... yes, I seem to have heard of Ithaca, 
even on Crete's broad island far across the sea. 



and now I've reached it myself, with all this loot, 

but 1 left behind an equal measure for my children. 

I'm a fugitive now, you see. 1 killed Idomeneus' son, 

Orsilochus, lightning on his legs, a man who beat 

all runners alive on that long island — what a racer! 

He tried to rob me of all the spoil I'd won at Troy, 

the plunder 1 went to hell and back to capture, true, 

cleaving my way through wars of men and waves at sea — 

and just because 1 refused to please his father, 

serve under him at Troy. 1 led my own command. 

So now with a friend 1 lay in wait by the road, 

1 killed him just loping in from the fields — 

with one quick stroke of my bronze spear 

in the dead of night, the heavens pitch-black ... 

no one could see us, spot me tearing out his life 

with a weapon honed for action. Once I'd cut him down 

1 made for a ship and begged the Phoenician crew for mercy, 

paying those decent hands a hearty share of plunder — 

asked them to take me on and land me down in Pylos, 

there or lovely Elis, where Epeans rule in power. 

But a heavy galewind blew them way off course, 

much against their will — 

they'd no desire to cheat me. Driven afar, 

we reached this island here at the midnight hour, 

rowing for dear life, we made it into your harbor — 

not a thought of supper, much as we all craved food, 

we dropped from the decks and lay down, just like that! 

A welcome sleep came over my weary bones at once, 

while the crew hoisted up my loot from the holds 

and set it down on the sand near where 1 slept. 

They reembarked, now homeward bound for Sidon, 

their own noble city, leaving me here behind, 

homesick in my heart ..." 

As his story ended, 
goddess Athena, gray eyes gleaming, broke into a smile 
and stroked him with her hand, and now she appeared a woman 
beautiful, tall and skilled at weaving lovely things. 
Her words went flying straight toward Odysseus: 



"Any man — any god who met you — would have to be 
some champion lying cheat to get past you 
for all-round craft and guile! You terrible man, 
foxy, ingenious, never tired of twists and tricks — 
so, not even here, on native soil, would you give up 
those wily tales that warm the cockles of your heart! 
Come, enough of this now. We're both old hands 
at the arts of intrigue. Here among mortal men 
you're far the best at tactics, spinning yarns, 
and 1 am famous among the gods for wisdom, 
cunning wiles, too. 

Ah, but you never recognized me, did you? 

Pallas Athena, daughter of Zeus — who always 

stands beside you, shields you in every exploit: 

thanks to me the Phaeacians all embraced you warmly. 

And now 1 am here once more, to weave a scheme with you 

and to hide the treasure-trove Phaeacia's nobles 

lavished on you then — 1 willed it, planned it so 

when you set out for home — and to tell you all 

the trials you must suffer in your palace ... 

Endure them all. You must. You have no choice. 

And to no one — no man, no woman, not a soul — 

reveal that you are the wanderer home at last. 

No, in silence you must bear a world of pain, 

subject yourself to the cruel abuse of men." 

"Ah goddess," the cool tactician countered, 
"you're so hard for a mortal man to know on sight, 
however shrewd he is — ^the shapes you take are endless! 
But 1 do know this: you were kind to me in the war years, 
so long as we men of Achaea soldiered on at Troy. 
But once we'd sacked King Priam's craggy city, 
boarded ship, and a god dispersed the fleet, 
from then on, daughter of Zeus, 1 never saw you, 
never glimpsed you striding along my decks 
to ward off some disaster. No, 1 wandered on, 
my heart forever torn to pieces inside my chest 



till the gods released me from my miseries at last, 

that day in the fertile kingdom of Phaeacia when 

you cheered me with words, in person, led me to their city. 

But now 1 beg you by your almighty Father's name ... 

for 1 can't believe I've reached my sunny Ithaca, 

1 must be roaming around one more exotic land — 

you're mocking me, 1 know it, telling me tales 

to make me lose my way. Tell me the truth now, 

have 1 really reached the land 1 love?" 

"Always the same, your wary turn of mind," 
Athena exclaimed, her glances flashing warmly. 
"That's why 1 can't forsake you in your troubles — 
you are so winning, so worldly-wise, so self-possessed! 
Anyone else, come back from wandering long and hard, 
would have hurried home at once, delighted to see 
his children and his wife. Oh, but not you, 
it's not your pleasure to probe for news of them — 
you must put your wife to the proof yourself! 
But she, she waits in your halls, as always, 
her life an endless hardship ... 
wasting away the nights, weeping away the days. 
1 never had doubts myself, no, 1 knew down deep 
that you would return at last, with all your shipmates lost. 
But 1 could not bring myself to fight my Father's brother, 
Poseidon, quaking with anger at you, still enraged 
because you blinded the Cyclops, his dear son. 
But come, let me show you Ithaca's setting, 
I'll convince you. This haven — look around — 
it's named for Phorcy s, the old god of the deep, 
and here at the harbor's head the branching olive stands 
with the welcome cave nearby it, dank with sea-mist, 
sacred to nymphs of the springs we call the Naiads. 
Here, under its arching vault, time and again 
you'd offer the nymphs a generous sacrifice 
to bring success! And the slopes above you, look. 
Mount Neriton decked in forests!" 



At those words 

the goddess scattered the mist and the country stood out clear 

and the great man who had borne so much rejoiced at last, 

thrilled to see his Ithaca — kissed the good green earth 

and raised his hands to the nymphs and prayed at once, 

"Nymphs of the springs, Naiads, daughters of Zeus, 

1 never dreamed 1 would see you yet again ... 

Now rejoice in my loving prayers — and later, 

just like the old days, 1 will give you gifts 

if Athena, Zeus 's daughter. Queen of Armies 

comes to my rescue, grants this fighter life 

and brings my son to manhood!" 

"Courage!"— 
goddess Athena answered, eyes afire — 
"Free your mind of all that anguish now. 
Come, quick, let's bury your treasures here 
in some recess of this haunted hallowed cave 
where they 'll be safe and sound, 
then we'll make plans so we can win the day." 

With that 

the goddess swept into the cavern's shadowed vault, 
searching for hiding-places far inside its depths 
while Odysseus hauled his treasures closer up, 
the gold, durable bronze and finespun robes, 
the Phaeacians' parting gifts. 
Once he'd stowed them well away, the goddess, 
Pallas Athena, daughter of storming Zeus, 
sealed the mouth of the cavern with a stone. 

Then down they sat by the sacred olive's trunk 
to plot the death of the high and mighty suitors. 
The bright-eyed goddess Athena led the way: 
"Royal son of Laertes, Odysseus, old campaigner, 
think how to lay your hands on all those brazen suitors, 
lording it over your house now, three whole years, 
courting your noble wife, offering gifts to win her. 
But she, forever broken-hearted for your return, 
builds up each man's hopes — 



dangling promises, dropping hints to each — 
but all the while with something else in mind. " 

"God help me!" the man of intrigue broke out: 
"Clearly I might have died the same ignoble death 
as Agamemnon, bled white in my own house too, 
if you had never revealed this to me now, 
goddess, blow-by-blow. 

Come, weave us a scheme so 1 can pay them back! 

You stand beside me, fire me with daring, fierce 

as the day we ripped Troy 's glittering crown of towers down. 

Stand by me — furious now as then, my bright-eyed one — 

and 1 would fight three hundred men, great goddess, 

with you to brace me, comrade-in-arms in battle!" 

Gray eyes ablaze, the goddess urged him on: 
"Surely I'll stand beside you, not forget you, 
not when the day arrives for us to do our work. 
Those men who court your wife and waste your goods? 
1 have a feeling some will splatter your ample floors 
with all their blood and brains. Up now, quickly. 
First 1 will transform you — no one must know you. 
1 will shrivel the supple skin on your lithe limbs, 
strip the russet curls from your head and deck you out 
in rags you'd hate to see some other mortal wear; 
I'll dim the fire in your eyes, so shining once — 
until you seem appalling to all those suitors, 
even your wife and son you left behind at home. 
But you, you make your way to the swineherd first, 
in charge of your pigs, and true to you as always, 
loyal friend to your son, to Penelope, so self-possessed. 
You'll find him posted beside his swine, grubbing round 
by Raven's Rock and the spring called Arethusa, 
rooting for feed that makes pigs sleek and fat, 
the nuts they love, the dark pools they drink. 
Wait there, sit with him, ask him all he knows. 
I'm off to Sparta, where the women are a wonder, 
to call Telemachus home, your own dear son, Odysseus. 



He's journeyed to Lacedaemon's rolling hills 
to see Menelaus, questing for news of you, 
hoping to learn if you are still alive." 

Shrewd Odysseus answered her at once: 
"Why not tell him the truth? You know it all. 
Or is he too — like father, like son — condemned 
to hardship, roving over the barren salt sea 
while strangers devour our livelihood right here?" 

But the bright-eyed goddess reassured him firmly: 
"No need for anguish, trust me, not for AJw — 
1 escorted your son myself 
so he might make his name by sailing there. 
Nor is he saddled down with any troubles now. 
He sits at ease in the halls of Menelaus, 
bathed in endless bounty ... True enough, 
some young lords in a black cutter lurk in ambush, 
poised to kill the prince before he reaches home, 
but 1 have my doubts they will. Sooner the earth 
will swallow down a few of those young gallants 
who eat you out of house and home these days!" 

No more words, not now — 
Athena stroked Odysseus with her wand. 
She shriveled the supple skin on his lithe limbs, 
stripped the russet curls from his head, covered his body 
top to toe with the wrinkled hide of an old man 
and dimmed the fire in his eyes, so shining once. 
She turned his shirt and cloak into squalid rags, 
ripped and filthy, smeared with grime and soot. 
She flung over this the long pelt of a bounding deer, 
rubbed bare, and gave him a staff and beggar's sack, 
torn and tattered, slung from a fraying rope. 

All plans made, 
they went their separate ways — ^Athena setting off 
to bring Telemachus home from hallowed Lacedaemon. 



 



The Loyal 
Swineherd 



So up from the haven now Odysseus climbed a rugged path 
through timber along high ground — ^Athena had shown the wag — 
to reach the swineherd's place, that fine loyal man 
who of all the household hands Odysseus ever had 
cared the most for his master's worldly goods. 

Sitting at the door of his lodge he found him, 
there in his farmstead, high-walled, broad and large, 
with its long view on its cleared rise of ground ... 
The swineherd made those walls with his own hands 
to enclose the pigs of his master gone for years. 
Alone, apart from his queen or old Laertes, 
he'd built them up of quarried blocks of stone 
and coped them well with a fence of wild pear. 



Outside he'd driven stakes in a long-line stockade, 

a ring of thickset palings split from an oak's dark heart. 

Within the yard he'd built twelve sties, side-by -side, 

to bed his pigs, and in each one fifty brood-sows 

slept aground, penned and kept for breeding. 

The boars slept outside, but far fewer of them, 

thanks to the lordly suitors' feasts that kept on 

thinning the herd and kept the swineherd stepping, 

sending to town each day the best fat hog in sight. 

By now they were down to three hundred and sixty head. 

But guarding them all the time were dogs like savage beasts, 

a pack of four, reared by the swineherd, foreman of men. 

The man himself was fitting sandals to his feet, 

carving away at an oxhide, dark and supple. 

As for his men, three were off with their pigs, 

herding them here or there. Under orders he'd sent 

a fourth to town, with hog in tow for the gorging suitors 

to slaughter off and glut themselves with pork. 

Suddenly — those snarling dogs spotted Odysseus, 
charged him fast — a shatter of barks — but Odysseus 
sank to the ground at once, he knew the trick: 
the staff dropped from his hand but here and now, 
on his own farm, he might have taken a shameful mauling. 
Yes, but the swineherd, quick to move, dashed for the gate, 
flinging his oxhide down, rushed the dogs with curses, 
scattered them left and right with flying rocks 
and warned his master, "Lucky to be alive, old man — 
a moment more, my pack would have torn you limb from limb! 
Then you'd have covered me with shame. As if the gods 
had never given me blows and groans aplenty ... 
Here 1 sit, my heart aching, broken for him, 
my master, my great king — fattening up 
his own hogs for other men to eat, while he, 
starving for food, 1 wager, wanders the earth, 
a beggar adrift in strangers' cities, foreign-speaking lands, 
if he's still alive, that is, still sees the rising sun. 
Come, follow me into my place, old man, so you. 



at least, can eat your fill of bread and wine. 
Then you can tell me where you're from 
and all the pains you've weathered." 

On that note 
the loyal swineherd led the way to his shelter, 
showed his guest inside and sat Odysseus down 
on brush and twigs he piled up for the visitor, 
flinging over these the skin of a shaggy wild goat, 
broad and soft, the swineherd's own good bedding. 
The king, delighted to be so well received, 
thanked the man at once: "My host — may Zeus 
and the other gods give you x^our heart's desire 
for the royal welcome you have shown me here!" 

And you replied, Eumaeus, loyal swineherd, 
"It's wrong, my friend, to send any stranger packing — 
even one who arrives in worse shape than you. 
Every stranger and beggar comes from Zeus 
and whatever scrap they get from the likes of us, 
they'll find it welcome. That's the best we can do, 
we servants, always cowed by our high and mighty masters, 
especially our young lords ... But my old master? 
The gods, they must have blocked his journey home. 
He'd have treated me well, he would, with a house, 
a plot of land and a wife you'd gladly prize. 
Goods that a kind lord will give a household hand 
who labors for him, hard, whose work the gods have sped, 
just as they speed the work 1 labor at all day. 
My master, 1 tell you, would have repaid me well 
if he'd grown old right here. But now he's dead ... 
If only Helen and all her kind had died out too, 
brought to her knees, just as she cut the legs 
from under troops of men! My king among them, 

went off to the stallion-land of Troy 
to fight the Trojans, save Agamemnon's honor!" 

Enough — 

he brusquely cinched his belt around his shirt, 
strode out to the pens, crammed with droves of pigs. 



picked out two, bundled them in and slaughtered both, 
singed them, sliced them down, skewered them through 
and roasting all to a turn, set them before Odysseus, 
sizzling hot on the spits. 

Then coating the meat with white barley groats 

and mixing honeyed wine in a carved wooden bowl, 

he sat down across from his guest, inviting warmly, 

"Eat up now, my friend. It's all we slaves have got, 

scrawny pork, while the suitors eat the fatted hogs — 

no fear of the gods in theirhard hearts, no mercy! 

Trust me, the blessed gods have no love for crime. 

They honor justice, honor the decent acts of men. 

Even cutthroat bandits who raid foreign parts — 

and Zeus grants them a healthy share of plunder, 

ships filled to the brim, and back they head for home — 

even their dark hearts are stalked by the dread of vengeance. 

But the suitors know, they've caught some godsent rumor 

of master's grisly death! That's why they have no mind 

to do their courting fairly or go back home in peace. 

No, at their royal ease they devour all his goods, 

those brazen rascals never spare a scrap! 

Not a day or a night goes by, sent down by Zeus, 

but they butcher victims, never stopping at one or two, 

and drain his wine as if there's no tomorrow — 

swilling the last drop ... 

Believe me, my master's wealth was vast! 

No other prince on earth could match his riches, 

not on the loamy mainland or here at home in Ithaca — 

no twenty men in the world could equal A/5 great treasures! 

Let me count them off for you. A dozen herds of cattle 

back on the mainland, just as many head of sheep, 

as many droves of pigs and goatflocks ranging free; 

hired hands or his own herdsmen keep them grazing there. 

Here in Ithaca, goatflocks, eleven in all, scatter 

to graze the island, out at the wild end, 

and trusty goatherds watch their every move. 

And each herdsman, day after day, it never ends, 



drives in a beast for the suitors — best in sight, 
a sheep or well-fed goat. While I tend to these pigs, 
I guard them, pick the best for those carousers 
and send it to the slaughter! " 

His voice rose 
while the stranger ate his meat and drank his wine, 
ravenous, bolting it all down in silence ... 
brooding on ways to serve the suitors right. 
But once he'd supped and refreshed himself with food, 
he filled the wooden bowl he'd been drinking from, 
brimmed it with wine and passed it to his host 
who received the offer gladly, spirit cheered 
as the stranger probed him now with winging words: 
"Friend, who was the man who bought you with his goods, 
the master of such vast riches, powerful as you say? 
You tell me he died defending Agamemnon's honor? 
What's his name? 1 just might know such a man ... 
Zeus would know, and the other deathless gods, 
if 1 ever saw him, if 1 bring you any news. 
I've roamed the whole earth over." 

And the good swineherd answered, foreman of men, 
"Old friend, no wanderer landing here with news of him 
is likely to win his wife and dear son over. 
Random drifters, hungry for bed and board, 
lie through their teeth and swallow back the truth. 
Why, any tramp washed up on Ithaca's shores 
scurries right to my mistress, babbling lies, 
and she ushers him in, kindly, pressing for details, 
and the warm tears of grief come trickling down her cheeks, 
the loyal wife's way when her husband's died abroad. 
Even you, old codger, could rig up some fine tale — 
and soon enough, I'd say, 

if they gave you shirt and clothing for your pains. 
My master? Well, no doubt the dogs and wheeling birds 
have ripped the skin from his ribs by now, his life is through — 
or fish have picked him clean at sea, and the man's bones 



lie piled up on the mainland, buried deep in sand ... 

he's dead and gone. Aye, leaving a broken heart 

for loved ones left behind, for /Tie most of all. 

Never another master kind as he! 

I'll never find one — no matter where 1 go, 

not even if 1 went back to mother and father, 

the house where 1 was born and my parents reared me once. 

Ah, but much as 1 grieve for them, much as 1 long 

to lay my eyes on them, set foot on the old soil, 

it's longing for him, himXhdLX. wrings my heart — 

Odysseus, lost and gone! 

That man, old friend, far away as he is ... 

1 can scarcely bear to say his name aloud, 

so deeply he loved me, cared for me, so deeply. 

Worlds away as he is, 1 call him Master, Brother!" 

"My friend," the great Odysseus, long in exile, answered, 
"since you are dead certain, since you still insist 
he's never coming back, still the soul of denial, 
1 won't simply say it — on my oath 1 swear 
Odysseus is on his way! 
Reward for such good news? Let me have it 
the moment he sets foot in his own house, 
dress me in shirt and cloak, in handsome clothes. 
Before then, poor as 1 am, 1 wouldn't take a thing. 
1 hate that man like the very Gates of Death who, 
ground down by poverty, stoops to peddling lies. 
1 swear by Zeus, the first of all the gods, 
by this table of hospitality here, my host, 
by Odysseus' hearth where 1 have come for help: 
all will come to pass, 1 swear, exactly as 1 say. 
True, this very month— just as the old moon dies 
and the new moon rises into life — Odysseus will return! 
He will come home and take revenge on any man 
who offends his wedded wife and princely son!" 



"Good news," you replied, Eumaeus, loyal swineherd, 
"but 1 will never pay a reward for that, old friend — 
Odysseus, he'll never come home again. Never ... 
Drink your wine, sit back, let's talk of other things. 
Don't remind me of all this. The heart inside me 
breaks when anyone mentions my dear master. 
That oath of yours, we'll let it pass — 

Odysseus, 

oh come back! — 

just as /wish, 1 and Penelope, 
old Laertes too, Telemachus too, the godlike boy. 
How 1 grieve for himno^N, 1 can't stop — Odysseus' son, 
Telemachus. The gods reared him up like a fine young tree 
and 1 often said, Tn the ranks of men he'll match his father, 
his own dear father — amazing in build and looks, that boy!' 
But all of a sudden a god wrecks his sense of balance — 
god or man, no matter — off he's gone to catch 
some news of his father, down to holy Pylos. 
And now those gallant suitors lie in wait for him, 
sailing home, to tear the royal line of Arcesius 
out of Ithaca, root and branch, good name and all! 
Enough. Let Jii'm pass too — ^whether he's trapped 
or the hand of Zeus will pull him through alive. 

Come, 

old soldier, tell me the story of your troubles, 

tell me truly, too, I'd like to know it well ... 

Who are you? where are you from? your city? your parents? 

What sort of vessel brought you? Why did the sailors 

land you here in Ithaca? Who did they say they are? 

1 hardly think you came this way on foot." 

The great teller of tales returned at length, 
"My story — ^the whole truth — I'm glad to tell it all. 
If only the two of us had food and mellow wine 
to last us long, here in your shelter now, 
for us to sup on, undisturbed, 
while others take the work of the world in hand, 
1 could easily spend all year and never reach the end 



of my endless story, all the heartbreaking trials 
1 struggled through. The gods willed it so ... 

1 hail from Crete's broad land, I'm proud to say, 
and 1 am a rich man's son. And many other sons 
he brought up in his palace, born in wedlock, 
sprung of his lawful wife. Unlike my mother. 
She was a slave, a concubine he'd purchased, yes, 
but he treated me on a par with all his true-born sons — 
Castor, Hylax' son. I'm proud to boast his blood, that man 
revered like a god throughout all Crete those days, 
for wealth, power and all his glorious offspring. 
But the deadly spirits soon swept him down 
to the House of Death, and his high and mighty sons 
carved up his lands and then cast lots for the parts 
and gave me just a pittance, a paltry house as well. 
But 1 won myself a wife from wealthy, landed people, 
thanks to my own strong points. 1 was no fool 
and never shirked a fight. 

But now my heyday's gone — 
I've had my share of blows. Yet look hard at the husk 
and you'll still see, 1 think, the grain that gave it life. 
By heaven, Ares gave me courage, Athena too, to break 
the ranks of men wide open, once, in the old days, 
whenever 1 picked my troops and formed an ambush, 
plotting attacks to spring against our foes — 
no hint of death could daunt my fighting spirit! 
Far out of the front I'd charge and spear my man, 
I'd cut down any enemy soldier backing off. 
Such was 1 in battle, true, but 1 had no love 
for working the land, the chores of households either, 
the labor that raises crops of shining children. No, 
it was always oarswept ships that thrilled my heart, 
and wars, and the long polished spears and arrows, 
dreadful gear that makes the next man cringe. 
1 loved them all — god planted that love inside me. 
Each man delights in the work that suits him best. 



Why, long before we Achaeans ever camped at Troy, 
nine commands I led in our deep-sea-going ships, 
raiding foreign men, and a fine haul reached my hands. 
1 helped myself to the lion's share and still more 
came by lot. And my house grew by leaps and bounds, 
1 walked among the Cretans, honored, feared as well. 

But then, when thundering Zeus contrived that expedition — 
that disaster that brought so many fighters to their knees — 
and men kept pressing me and renowned Idomeneus 
to head a fleet to Troy, 

there was no way out, no denying them then, 

the voice of the people bore down much too hard. 

So nine whole years we Achaeans soldiered on at Troy, 

in the tenth we sacked King Priam's city, then embarked 

for home in the long ships, and a god dispersed the fleet. 

Unlucky me. Shrewd old Zeus was plotting still more pain. 

No more than a month 1 stayed at home, taking joy 

in my children, loyal wife and lovely plunder. 

But a spirit in me urged, 'Set sail for Egypt — 

fit out ships, take crews of seasoned heroes!' 

Nine 1 fitted out, the men joined up at once 

and then six days my shipmates feasted well, 

while 1 provided a flock of sheep to offer up 

to the gods and keep the feasters' table groaning. 

On the seventh we launched out from the plains of Crete 

with a stiff North Wind fair astern — smooth sailing, 

aye, like coasting on downstream ... 

And not one craft in our squadron foundered; 

all shipshape, and all hands sound, we sat back 

while the wind and helmsmen kept us true on course. 

Five days out and we raised the great river Nile 
and there in the Nile delta moored our ships of war. 
God knows 1 ordered my trusty crews to stand by, 
just where they were, and guard the anchored fleet 
and 1 sent a patrol to scout things out from higher ground. 



But swept away by their own reckless fury, the crew went berserk — 

they promptly began to plunder the lush Egyptian farms, 

dragged off the women and children, killed the men. 

Outcries reached the city in no time — stirred by shouts 

the entire town came streaming down at the break of day, 

filling the river plain with chariots, ranks of infantry 

and the gleam of bronze. Zeus who loves the lightning 

flung down murderous panic on all my men-at-arms — 

no one dared to stand his ground and fight, 

disaster ringed us round from every quarter. 

Droves of my men they hacked down with swords, 

led off the rest alive, to labor for them as slaves. 

And 1? Zeus flashed an inspiration through my mind, 

though 1 wish I'd died a soldier down in Egypt then! 

A world of pain, you see, still lay in wait for me ... 

Quickly 1 wrenched the skullcap helmet off my head, 

1 tore the shield from my back and dropped my spear 

and ran right into the path of the king's chariot, 

hugged and kissed his knees. He pitied me, spared me, 

hoisted me onto his war-car, took me home in tears. 

Troops of his men came rushing after, shaking javelins, 

mad to kill me — ^their fighting blood at the boil — 

but their master drove them off. 

He feared the wrath of Zeus, the god of guests, 

the first of the gods to pay back acts of outrage. 

So, 

there 1 lingered for seven years, amassing a fortune 
from all the Egyptian people loading me with gifts. 
Then, at last, when the eighth had come full turn, 
along comes this Phoenician one fine day ... 
a scoundrel, swindler, an old hand at lies 
who'd already done the world a lot of damage. 
Well, he smoothly talked me round and off we sailed, 
Phoenicia-bound, where his house and holdings lay. 
There in his care 1 stayed till the year was out. 
Then, when the months and days had run their course 
and the year wheeled round and the seasons came again, 
he conned me aboard his freighter bound for Libya, 



pretending I'd help him ship a cargo there for sale 

but in fact he'd sell meihere and make a killing! 

1 suspected as much, of course, but had no choice, 

so 1 boarded with him, yes, and the ship ran on 

with a good strong North Wind gusting — 

fast on the middle passage clear of Crete — 

but Zeus was brewing mischief for that crew ... 

Once we'd left the island in our wake — 

no land at all in sight, nothing but sea and sky — 

then Zeus the son of Cronus mounted a thunderhead 

above our hollow ship and the deep went black beneath it. 

Then, then in the same breath Zeus hit the craft 

with a lightning-bolt and thunder. Round she spun, 

reeling under the impact, filled with reeking brimstone, 

shipmates pitching out of her, bobbing round like seahawks 

swept along by the breakers past the trim black hull — 

and the god cut short their journey home forever. 

Not mine. 

Zeus himself — when 1 was just at the final gasp — 

thrust the huge mast of my dark-prowed vessel 

right into my arms so 1 might flee disaster 

one more time. Wrapping myself around it, 

1 was borne along by the wretched galewinds, 

rushed along nine days — on the tenth, at dead of night, 

a shouldering breaker rolled me up along Thesprotia's beaches. 

There the king of Thesprotia, Phidon, my salvation, 

treated me kindly, asked for no reward at all. 

His own good son had found me, half-dead 

from exhaustion and the cold. He raised me up 

by the hand and led me home to his father's house 

and dressed me in cloak and shirt and decent clothes. 

That's where 1 first got wind of AJm — Odysseus ... 

The king told me he'd hosted the man in style, 

befriended him on his way home to native land, 

and showed me all the treasure Odysseus had amassed. 

Bronze and gold and plenty of hard wrought iron, 

enough to last a man and ten generations of his heirs — 

so great the wealth stored up for Jn'm in the king's vaults! 



But Odysseus, he made clear, was off at Dodona then 
to hear the will of Zeus that rustles forth 
from the god's tall leafy oak: how should he return, 
after all the years away, to his own green land of Ithaca — 
openly or in secret? Phidon swore to me, what's more, 
as the princely man poured out libations in his house, 
The ship's hauled down and the crew set to sail, 
to take Odysseus home to native land.' 

Butl... 

he shipped me off before. A Thesprotian cutter 

chanced to be heading for Dulichion rich in wheat, 

so he told the crew to take me to the king, Acastus, 

treat me kindly, too, but it pleased them more 

to scheme foul play against me, 

sink me into the very depths of pain. As soon 

as the ship was far off land, scudding in mid-sea, 

they sprang their trap — my day of slavery then and there! 

They stripped from my back the shirt and cloak 1 wore, 

decked me out in a new suit of clothes, all rags, 

ripped and filthy — the rags you see right now. 

But then, once they'd gained the fields of Ithaca, 

still clear in the evening light, they lashed me fast 

to the rowing-benches, twisting a cable round me; 

all hands went ashore 

and rushed to catch their supper on the beach. 

But the gods themselves unhitched my knots at once 

with the gods' own ease. 1 wrapped my head in rags, 

slid down the gangplank polished smooth, slipped my body 

into the water, not a splash, chest-high, then quick, 

launched out with both my arms and swam away — 

out of the surf in no time, clear of the crew. 

1 clambered upland, into a flowery, fragrant brush 

and crouched there, huddling low. They raised a hue and cry, 

wildly beat the bushes, but when it seemed no use 

to pursue the hunt, back they trudged again and 

boarded their empty ship. 

The gods hid me themselves — 



it's light work for them — and brought me here, 
the homestead of a man who knows the world. 
So it seems to be my lot that I'll live on. " 

And you replied, Eumaeus, loyal swineherd, 
"So much misery, friend! You've moved my heart, 
deeply, with your long tale ... such blows, such roving. 
But one part's off the mark, 1 know — you'll never persuade me — 
what you say about Odysseus. A man in your condition, 
who are you, 1 ask you, to lie for no good reason? 
Well 1 know the truth of my good lord's return, 
how the gods detested him, with a vengeance — 
never letting him go under, fighting Trojans, 
or die in the arms of loved ones, 
once he'd wound down the long coil of war. 
Then all united Achaea would have raised his tomb 
and he'd have won his son great fame for years to come. 
But now the whirlwinds have ripped him away — no fame for him. 
And 1 live here, cut off from the world, with all my pigs. 
I never go into town unless, perhaps, wise Penelope 
calls me back, when news drops in from nowhere. 
There they crowd the messenger, cross-examine him, 
heartsick for their long-lost lord or all too glad 
to eat him out of house and home, scot-free. 
But I've no love for all that probing, prying, 
not since some Aetolian fooled me with his yarn. 
He'd killed a man, wandered over the face of the earth, 
stumbled onto my hut, and 1 received him warmly. 
He told me he'd seen Odysseus 
lodged with King Idomeneus down in Crete — 
refitting his ships, hard-hit by the gales, 
but he'd be home, he said, by summer or harvest-time, 
his hulls freighted with treasure, manned by fighting crews. 
So you, old misery, seeing a god has led you here to me, 
don't try to charm me now, don't spellbind /newith lies! 
Never for that^N\\\ 1 respect you, treat you kindly; 
no, it's my fear of Zeus, the god of guests. 



and because I pity you ..." 

"Good god, " the crafty man pressed on, 
"what a dark, suspicious heart you have inside you! 
Not even my oath can win you over, make you see the light. 
Come, strike a bargain — all the gods of Olympus 
witness now our pact! 
If your master returns, here to your house, 
dress me in shirt and cloak and send me off 
to Dulichion at once, the place 1 long to be. 
But if your master doesn't return as 1 predict, 
set your men on me — fling me off some rocky crag 
so the next beggar here may just think twice 
before he peddles lies. " 

"Surely, friend!"— 
the swineherd shook his head — "and just think 
of the praise and fame I'd win among mankind, 
now and for all time to come, if first 1 took you 
under my roof, 1 treated you kindly as my guest 
then cut you down and robbed you of your life — 
how keen I'd be to say my prayers to Zeus! 
But it's high time for a meal. 
1 hope the men will come home any moment 
so we can fix a tasty supper in the lodge. " 

As host and guest confided back and forth 
the herdsmen came in, driving their hogs up close, 
penning sows in their proper sties for the night, 
squealing for all they're worth, shut inside their yard, 
and the good swineherd shouted to his men, 
"Bring in your fattest hog! 
I'll slaughter it for our guest from far abroad. 
We'll savor it ourselves. All too long we've sweated 
over these white-tusked boars — our wretched labor — 
while others wolf our work down free of charge!" 

Calling out 

as he split up kindling now with a good sharp ax 
and his men hauled in a tusker five years old. 



rippling fat, and stood him steady by the hearth. 

The swineherd, soul of virtue, did not forget the gods. 

He began the rite by plucking tufts from the porker's head, 

threw them into the fire and prayed to all the powers, 

"Bring him home, our wise Odysseus, home at last!" 

Then raising himself full-length, with an oak log 

he'd left unsplit he clubbed and stunned the beast 

and it gasped out its life ... 

The men slashed its throat, singed the carcass, 

quickly quartered it all, and then the swineherd, 

cutting first strips for the gods from every limb, 

spread them across the thighs, wrapped in sleek fat, 

and sprinkling barley over them, flung them on the fire. 

They sliced the rest into pieces, pierced them with skewers, 

broiled them all to a turn and, pulling them off the spits, 

piled the platters high. The swineherd, standing up 

to share the meat — his sense of fairness perfect — 

carved it all out into seven equal portions. 

One he set aside, lifting up a prayer 

to the forest nymphs and Hermes, Maia's son, 

and the rest he handed on to each man in turn. 

But to Odysseus he presented the boar's long loin 

and the cut of honor cheered his master's heart. 

The man for all occasions thanked his host: 

"1 pray, Eumaeus, you'll be as dear to Father Zeus 

as you are to me — a man in my condition — 

you honor me by giving me your best." 

You replied in kind, Eumaeus, swineherd: 
"Eat, my strange new friend ... enjoy it now, 
it's all we have to offer. As for Father Zeus, 
one thing he will give and another he'll hold back, 
whatever his pleasure. All things are in his power." 

He burned choice parts for the gods who never die 
and pouring glistening wine in a full libation, 
placed the cup in his guest's hands — Odysseus, 
raider of cities — and down he sat to his own share. 



Mesaulius served them bread, a man the swineherd 
purchased for himself in his master's absence — 
alone, apart from his queen or old Laertes — 
bought him from Taphians, bartered his own goods. 
They reached out for the spread that lay at hand 
and when they'd put aside desire for food and drink, 
Mesaulius cleared the things away. And now, content 
with bread and meat, they made for bed at once. 

A foul night came on — the dark of the moon — and Zeus 
rained from dusk to dawn and a sodden West Wind raged. 
Odysseus spoke up now, keen to test the swineherd. 
Would he take his cloak off, hand it to his guest 
or at least tell one of his men to do the same? 
He cared for the stranger so, who ventured now, 
"Listen, Eumaeus, and all you comrades here, 
allow me to sing my praises for a moment. 
Say it's the wine that leads me on, the wild wine 
that sets the wisest man to sing at the top of his lungs, 
laugh like a fool — it drives the man to dancing ... it even 
tempts him to blurt out stories better never told. 
But now that I'm sounding off, 1 can't hold back. 
Oh make me young again, and the strength inside me 
steady as a rock! Just as 1 was that day 
we sprang a sudden ambush against the Trojans. 
Odysseus led the raid with Atreus' son Menelaus. 
1 was third in command — they'd chosen me themselves. 
Once we'd edged up under the city's steep ramparts, 
crowding the walls but sinking into the thick brake, 
the reeds and marshy flats, huddling under our armor 
there we lay, and a foul night came on, the North Wind struck, 
freezing cold, and down from the skies the snow fell like frost, 
packed hard — ^the rims of our shields armored round with ice. 
There all the rest of the men wore shirts and cloaks and, 
hunching shields over their shoulders, slept at ease. 
Not 1. I'd left my cloak at camp when 1 set out- — 
idiot — never thinking it might turn cold, 
so 1 joined in with just the shield on my back 



and a shining waist-guard ... But then at last, 
the night's third watch, the stars just wheeling down — 
I muttered into his ear, Odysseus, right beside me, 
nudging him with an elbow — he perked up at once — 
'Royal son of Laertes, Odysseus, full of tactics, 
I'm not long for the living. The cold will do me in. 
See, I've got no cloak. Some spirit's fooled me — 
1 came out half-dressed. Now there's no escape!' 
1 hadn't finished — a thought flashed in his mind; 
no one could touch the man at plots or battles. 
'Shhh!' he hissed back — Odysseus had a plan — 
'One of our fighters over there might hear you.' 
Then he propped his head on his forearm, calling out, 
'Friends, wake up. 1 slept and a god sent down a dream. 
It warned that we're too far from the ships, exposed. 
Go, someone, tell Agamemnon, our field marshal — 
he might rush reinforcements from the beach.' 
Thoas, son of Andraemon, sprang up at once, 
flung off his purple cloak and ran to the ships 
while 1, bundling into his wrap, was glad at heart 
till Dawn rose on her golden throne once more. 
Oh make me young again 
and the strength inside me steady as a rock! 
One of the swineherds here would lend a wrap, 
for love of a good soldier, respect as well. 
Now they spurn me, dressed in filthy rags." 

And you replied, Eumaeus, loyal swineherd, 
"Now tAatynas a fine yarn you told, old-timer, 
not without point, not without profit either. 
You won't want for clothes or whatever else 
is due a worn-out traveler come for help — 
not for tonight at least. Tomorrow morning 
you'll have to flap around in rags again. 
Here we've got no store of shirts and cloaks, 
no changes. Just one wrap per man, that's all. 
But just you wait till Odysseus' dear son comes back — 
that boy will deck you out in a cloak and shirt 



and send you off, wherever your heart desires!" 

With that 

he rose to his feet, laid out a bed by the fire, 
throwing over it skins of sheep and goats and 
down Odysseus lay. Eumaeus flung on his guest 
the heavy flaring cloak he kept in reserve 
to wear when winter brought some wild storm. 

So here 

Odysseus slept and the young hands slept beside him. 
Not the swineherd. Not his style to bed indoors, 
apart from his pigs. He geared up to go outside 
and it warmed Odysseus' heart, 
Eumaeus cared so much for his absent master's goods. 
First, over his broad shoulders he slung a whetted sword, 
wrapped himself in a cloak stitched tight to block the wind, 
and adding a cape, the pelt of a shaggy well-fed goat, 
he took a good sharp lance to fight off men and dogs. 
Then out he went to sleep where his white-tusked boars 
had settled down for the night ... just under 
a jutting crag that broke the North Wind's blast. 



 



The Prince Sets Sail 
for Home 

Now south through the spacious dancing-rings of Lacedaemon 

Athena went to remind the hero's princely son 

of his journey home and spur him on his way. 

She found him there with Nestor's gallant son, 

bedded down in the porch of illustrious Menelaus — 

Pisistratus, at least overcome with deep sound sleep, 

but not Telemachus. Welcome sleep could not hold him. 

All through the godsent night he lay awake ... 

tossing with anxious thoughts about his father. 

Hovering over him, eyes ablaze, Athena said, 

"It's wrong, Telemachus, wrong to rove so far, 

so long from home, leaving your own holdings 

unprotected — crowds in your palace so brazen 

they'll carve up all your wealth, devour it all, 

and then your journey here will come to nothing. 



Quickly, press Menelaus, lord of the warcry , 
to speed you home at once, if you want to find 
your irreproachable mother still inside your house. 
Even now her father and brothers urge Penelope 
to marry Eurymachus, who excels all other suitors 
at giving gifts and drives the bride-price higher. 
She must not carry anything off against your will! 
You know how the heart of a woman always works: 
she likes to build the wealth of her new groom — 
of the sons she bore, of her dear, departed husband, 
not a memory of the dead, no questions asked. 
So sail for home, 1 say! 

With your own hands turn over all your goods 
to the one serving-woman you can trust the most, 
till the gods bring to light your own noble bride. 

And another thing. Take it to heart, 1 tell you. 
Picked men of the suitors lie in ambush, grim-set 
in the straits between Ithaca and rocky Same, 
poised to kill you before you can reach home, 
but 1 have my doubts they will. Sooner the earth 
will swallow down a few of those young gallants 
who eat you out of house and home these days! 
Just give the channel islands a wide berth, 
push on in your trim ship, sail night and day, 
and the deathless god who guards and pulls you through 
will send you a fresh fair wind from hard astern. 
At your first landfall, Ithaca's outer banks, 
speed ship and shipmates round to the city side. 
But you — you make your way to the swineherd first, 
in charge of your pigs, and true to you as always. 
Sleep the night there, send him to town at once 
to tell the news to your mother, wise Penelope — 
you've made it back from Pylos safe and sound." 

Mission accomplished, back she went to Olympus' heights 
as Telemachus woke Nestor's son from his sweet sleep; 
he dug a heel in his ribs and roused him briskly: 



"Up, Pisistratus. Hitch the team to the chariot — 
let's head for home at once!" 

"No, Telemachus," 
Nestor's son objected, "much as we long to go, 
we cannot drive a team in the dead of night. 
Morning will soon be here. So wait, I say, 
wait till he loads our chariot down with gifts — 
the hero Atrides, Menelaus, the great spearman — 
and gives us warm salutes and sees us off like princes. 
That's the man a guest will remember all his days: 
the lavish host who showers him with kindness. " 

At those words Dawn rose on her golden throne 
and Menelaus, lord of the warcry , rising up from bed 
by the side of Helen with her loose and lovely hair, 
walked toward his guests. As soon as he saw him, 
Telemachus rushed to pull a shimmering tunic on, 
over his broad shoulders threw his flaring cape 
and the young prince, son of King Odysseus, 
strode out to meet his host: "Menelaus, 
royal son of Atreus, captain of armies, 
let me go back to my own country now. 
The heart inside me longs for home at last." 

The lord of the warcry reassured the prince, 
"I'd never detain you here too long, Telemachus, 
not if your heart is set on going home. 
I'd find fault with another host, I'm sure, 
too warm to his guests, too pressing or too cold. 
Balance is best in all things. It's bad either way, 
spurring the stranger home who wants to linger, 
holding the one who longs to leave — you know, 
'Welcome the coming, speed the parting guest!' 
But wait till 1 load your chariot down with gifts — 
fine ones, too, you'll see with your own eyes — 
and tell the maids to serve a meal at hall. 
We have god's plenty here. 
It's honor and glory to us, a help to you as well. 



if you dine in style first, then leave to see the world. 
And if you're keen for the grand tour of all Hellas, 
right to the depths of Argos, I'll escort you myself, 
harness the horses, guide you through the towns. 
And no host will turn us away with empty hands, 
each will give us at least one gift to prize — 
a handsome tripod, cauldron forged in bronze, 
a brace of mules or a solid golden cup." 

Firmly resolved, Telemachus replied, 
"Menelaus, royal Atrides, captain of armies, 
1 must go back to my own home at once. 
When 1 started out 1 left no one behind 
to guard my own possessions. God forbid, 
searching for my great father, 1 lose my life 
or lose some priceless treasure from my house!" 

As soon as the lord of the warcry heard that, 
he told his wife and serving-women to lay out a meal 
in the hall at once. They'd stores aplenty there. 
Eteoneus, son of Boethous, came to join them — 
fresh from bed, he lived close by the palace. 
The warlord Menelaus told him to build a fire 
and broil some meat. He quickly did his bidding. 
Down Atrides walked to a storeroom filled with scent, 
and not alone: Helen and Megapenthes went along. 
Reaching the spot where all the heirlooms lay, 
Menelaus chose a generous two-handled cup; 
he told his son Megapenthes to take a mixing-bowl, 
solid silver, while Helen lingered beside the chests, 
and there they were, brocaded, beautiful robes 
her own hands had woven. Queenly Helen, 
radiance of women, lifted one from the lot, 
the largest, loveliest robe, and richly worked 
and like a star it glistened, deep beneath the others. 
Then all three went up and on through the halls until 
they found Telemachus. The red-haired king spoke out: 
"Oh my boy, may Zeus the Thunderer, Hera's lord. 



grant you the journey home your heart desires! 
Of all the treasures lying heaped in my palace 
you shall have the finest, most esteemed. Look, 
I'll give you this mixing-bowl, forged to perfection — 
it's solid silver finished off with a lip of gold. 
Hephaestus made it himself. And a royal friend, 
Phaedimus, king of Sidon, lavished it on me 
when his palace welcomed me on passage home. 
How pleased I'd be if you took it as a gift! " 

And the warlord placed the two-eared cup 
in his hands while stalwart Megapenthes carried in 
the glittering silver bowl and set it down before him. 
Helen, her cheeks flushed with beauty, moved beside him, 
holding the robe in her arms, and offered, warmly, 
"Here, dear boy, 1 too have a gift to give you, 
a keepsake of Helen — 1 wove it with my hands — 
for your own bride to wear 
when the blissful day of marriage dawns ... 
Until then, let it rest in your mother's room. 
And may you return in joy — my parting wish — 
to your own grand house, your native land at last." 

With that 

she laid the robe in his arms, and he received it gladly. 

Prince Pisistratus, taking the gifts, stowed them deep 

in the chariot cradle, viewed them all with wonder. 

The red-haired warlord led them back to his house 

and the guests took seats on low and high-backed chairs. 

A maid brought water soon in a graceful golden pitcher 

and over a silver basin tipped it out 

so they might rinse their hands, 

then pulled a gleaming table to their side. 

A staid housekeeper brought on bread to serve them, 

appetizers aplenty too, lavish with her bounty. 

Ready Eteoneus carved and passed the meat, 

the son of illustrious Menelaus poured their wine. 

They reached out for the good things that lay at hand 

and once they 'd put aside desire for food and drink. 



Prince Telemachus and the gallant son of Nestor 
yoked their team, mounted the blazoned car 
and drove through the gates and echoing colonnade. 
The red-haired King Menelaus followed both boys out, 
his right hand holding a golden cup of honeyed wine 
so the two might pour libations forth at parting. 
Just in front of the straining team he strode, 
lifting his cup and pledging both his guests: 
"Farewell, my princes! Give my warm greetings 
to Nestor, the great commander, 
always kind to me as a father, long ago 
when we young men of Achaea fought at Troy." 

And tactful Telemachus replied at once, 
"Surely, my royal host, we'll tell him all, 
as soon as we reach old Nestor — all you say. 
1 wish 1 were just as sure I'd find Odysseus 
waiting there at home when 1 reach Ithaca. 
I'd tell him 1 come from you, 
treated with so much kindness at your hands, 
loaded down with all these priceless gifts!" 

At his last words a bird flew past on the right, 
an eagle clutching a huge white goose in its talons, 
plucked from the household yards. And all rushed after, 
shouting, men and women, and swooping toward the chariot now 
the bird veered off to the right again before the horses. 
All looked up, overjoyed — people's spirits lifted. 
Nestor's son Pisistratus spoke out first: 
"Look there! King Menelaus, captain of armies, 
what, did the god send down that sign for you 
or the two of us?' 

The warlord fell to thinking — 
how to read the omen rightly, how to reply? ... 
But long-robed Helen stepped in well before him: 
"Listen to me and 1 will be your prophet, 
sure as the gods have flashed it in my mind 
and it will come to pass, 1 know it will. 



Just as the eagle swooped down from the crags 
where it was born and bred, just as it snatched 
that goose fattened up for the kill inside the house, 
so, after many trials and roving long and hard, 
Odysseus will descend on his house and take revenge — 
unless he's home already, sowing seeds of ruin 
for that whole crowd of suitors! " 

"Oh if only," 

pensive Telemachus burst out in thanks to Helen, 
"Zeus the thundering lord of Hera makes it so — 
even at home I'll pray to you as a deathless goddess!" 

He cracked the lash and the horses broke quickly, 
careering through the city out into open country, 
shaking the yoke across their shoulders all day long. 

The sun sank and the roads of the world grew dark 
as they reached Phera, pulling up to Diodes' halls, 
the son of Ortilochus, son of the Alpheus River. 
He gave them a royal welcome; there they slept the night. 

When young Dawn with her rose-red fingers shone once more 
they yoked their pair again, mounted the blazoned car 
and out through the gates and echoing colonnade 
they whipped the team to a run and on they flew, 
holding nothing back, approaching Pylos soon, 
the craggy citadel. That was when Telemachus 
turned to Pisistratus, saying, "Son of Nestor, 
won't you do as 1 ask you, see it through? 
We're friends for all our days now, so we claim, 
thanks to our fathers' friendship. We're the same age as well 
and this tour of ours has made us more like brothers. 
Prince, don't drive me past my vessel, drop me there. 
Your father's old, in love with his hospitality; 
1 fear he'll hold me, chafing in his palace — 
1 must hurry home!" 

The son of Nestor pondered ... 
how to do it properly, see it through? 



Pausing a moment, then this way seemed best. 
Swerving his team, he drove down to the ship 
tied up on shore and loaded into her stern 
the splendid gifts, the robes and gold Menelaus gave, 
and sped his friend with a flight of winging words: 
"Climb aboard now — fast! Muster all your men 
before 1 get home and break the news to father. 
With that man's overbearing spirit — 1 know it, 
know it all too well — he'll never let you go, 
he'll come down here and summon you himself. 
He won't return without you, believe me; 
in any case he'll fly into a rage." 

With that warning he whipped his sleek horses 
back to Pylos city and reached his house in no time. 
Telemachus shouted out commands to all his shipmates: 
"Stow our gear, my comrades, deep in the holds 
and board at once — we must be on our way!" 

His shipmates snapped to orders, 
swung aboard and sat to the oars in ranks. 
But just as Telemachus prepared to launch, 
praying, sacrificing to Pallas by the stern, 
a man from a far-off country came toward him now, 
a fugitive out of Argos: he had killed a man ... 
He was a prophet, sprung of Melampus' line of seers, 
Melampus who lived in Pylos, mother of flocks, some years ago, 
rich among his Pylians, at home in his great high house 
until he was made to go abroad to foreign parts, 
fleeing his native land and hot-blooded Neleus — 
most imperious man alive — ^who'd commandeered 
his vast estate and held it down by force 
for one entire year. That year Melampus, 
bound by cruel chains in the halls of Phylacus, 
suffered agonies — all for Neleus' daughter Pero, 
that and the mad spell a Fury, murderous spirit, 
cast upon his mind. But the seer worked free of death 



and drove the lusty, bellowing cattle out of Phylace, 

back to Pylos. There he avenged himself on Neleus 

for the shameful thing the king had done to him, 

and escorted Pero home as his brother's bride. 

But he himself went off to a distant country, 

Argos, land of stallions — his destined home 

where he would live and rule the Argive nation. 

Here he married a wife and built a high-roofed house 

and sired Antiphates and Mantius, two staunch sons. 

Antiphates fathered Oicles, gallant heart, 

Oicles fathered Amphiaraus, driver of armies, 

whom storming Zeus and Apollo loved intensely, 

showering him with every form of kindness. 

But he never reached the threshold of old age, 

he died at Thebes — undone by a bribe his wife accepted — 

leaving behind his two sons, Alcmaeon and Amphilochus. 

On his side Mantius sired Polyphides and Clitus both 

but Dawn of the golden throne whisked Clitus away, 

overwhelmed by his beauty, 

so the boy would live among the deathless gods. 

Yet Apollo made magnanimous Polyphides a prophet — 

after Amphiaraus' death — the greatest seer on earth. 

But a feud with his father drove him off to Hyperesia 

where he made his home and prophesied to the world ... 

This prophet's son it was — ^Theocly menus his name — 
who approached Telemachus now and found him pouring 
wine to a god and saying prayers beside his ship. 
"Friend," he said in a winging supplication, 
"since 1 find you burning offerings here, 
1 beg you by these rites and the god you pray to, 
then by your own life and the lives of all the men 
who travel with you — ^tell me truly, don't hold back, 
who are you? where are you from? your city? your parents?" 

"Of course, stranger, " the forthright prince responded, 
"1 will tell you everything, clearly as 1 can. 



Ithaca is my country. Odysseus is my father — 
there was a man, or was he all a dream? ... 
but he's surely died a wretched death by now. 
Yet here I've come with my crew and black ship, 
out for news of my father, lost and gone so long." 

And the godlike seer Theoclymenus replied, 
"Just like you, I too have left my land — 
I because I killed a man of my own tribe. 
But he has many brothers and kin in Argos, 
stallion-land, who rule the plains in force. 
Fleeing death at their hands, a dismal fate, 
1 am a fugitive now, 

doomed to wander across this mortal world. 

So take me aboard, hear a fugitive's prayer: 

don't let them kill me — they're after me, well 1 know!" 

"So desperate! " thoughtful Telemachus exclaimed. 
"How could 1 drive you from my ship? Come sail with us, 
we'll tend you at home, with all we can provide." 

And he took the prophet's honed bronze spear, 
laid it down full-length on the rolling deck, 
swung aboard the deep-sea craft himself, 
assuming the pilot's seat reserved astern 
and put the seer beside him. Cables cast off, 
Telemachus shouted out commands to all his shipmates: 
"All lay hands to tackle!" They sprang to orders, 
hoisting the pinewood mast, they stepped it firm 
in its block amidships, lashed it fast with stays 
and with braided rawhide halyards hauled the white sail high. 
Now bright-eyed Athena sent them a stiff following wind 
blustering out of a clear sky, gusting on so the ship 
might run its course through the salt sea at top speed — 
and past the Springs she raced and the Chalcis' rushing stream 
as the sun sank and the roads of the world grew dark and 
on she pressed for Pheae, driven on by a wind from Zeus 
and flew past lovely Elis, where Epeans rule in power. 



and then Telemachus veered for the Jagged Islands, 

wondering all the way — 

would he sweep clear of death or be cut down? 

The king and loyal swineherd, just that night, 
were supping with other fleldhands in the lodge. 
Once they 'd put aside desire for food and drink, 
Odysseus spoke up, eager to test the swineherd, 
see if he'd stretch out his warm welcome now, 
invite him to stay on in the farmstead here 
or send him off to town. "Listen, Eumaeus, 
all you comrades here — at the crack of dawn 
1 mean to go to town and do my begging, 
not be a drain on you and all your men. 
But advise me well, give me a trusty guide 
to see me there. And then I'm on my own 
to roam the streets — 1 must, 1 have no choice — 
hoping to find a handout, just a crust or cupful. 
I'd really like to go to the house of King Odysseus 
and give my news to his cautious queen, Penelope. 
Why, I'd even mix with those overweening suitors — 
would they spare me a plateful? Look at all they have! 
I'd do good work for them, promptly, anything they want. 
Let me tell you, listen closely, catch my drift ... 
Thanks to Hermes the guide, who gives all work 
of our hands the grace and fame that it deserves, 
no one alive can match me at household chores: 
building a good fire, splitting kindling neatly, 
carving, roasting meat and pouring rounds of wine ... 
anything menials do to serve their noble masters." 

"God's sake, my friend!" you broke in now, 
Eumaeus, loyal swineherd, deeply troubled. 
"What's got into your head, what crazy plan? 
You must be hell-bent on destruction, on the spot, 
if you're keen to mingle with that mob of suitors — 
their pride and violence hit the iron skies! 
They 're a far cry from you, 



the men who do their bidding. Young bucks, 
all rigged out in their fine robes and shirts, 
hair sleeked down with oil, faces always beaming, 
the ones who slave for them/The tables polished, 
sagging under the bread and meat and wine. 
No, stay here. No one finds you a burden, 
surely not 1, not any comrade here. 
You wait till Odysseus' dear son comes back — 
that boy will deck you out in a cloak and shirt 
and send you off, wherever your heart desires! " 

"If only, Eumaeus," the wayworn exile said, 
"you were as dear to Father Zeus as you are to me! 
You who stopped my pain, my endless, homesick roving. 
Tramping about the world — there's nothing worse for a man. 
But the fact is that men put up with misery 
to stuff their cursed bellies. 
But seeing you hold me here, urging me now 
to wait for AJm, the prince who's on his way, 
tell me about the mother of King Odysseus, please, 
the father he left as well — on the threshold of old age — 
when he sailed off to war. Are they still alive, 
perhaps, still looking into the light of day? 
Or dead by now, and down in Death's long house?" 

"Friend," 

the swineherd, foreman of men, assured his guest, 

"I'll tell you the whole story, point by point. 

Laertes is still alive, but night and day 

he prays to Zeus, waiting there in his house, 

for the life breath to slip away and leave his body. 

His heart's so racked for his son, lost and gone these years, 

for his wife so fine, so wise — Aerdeath is the worst blow 

he's had to suffer — it made him old before his time. 

She died of grief for her boy, her glorious boy, 

it wore her down, a wretched way to go. 

1 pray that no one 1 love dies such a death, 

no island neighbor of mine who treats me kindly! 

While she was still alive, heartsick as she was. 



it always moved me to ask about her, learn the news. 

She'd reared me herself, and right beside her daughter, 

Ctimene, graceful girl with her long light gown, 

the youngest one she'd borne ... 

Just the two of us, growing up together, 

the woman tending me almost like her child, 

till we both reached the lovely flush of youth 

and then her parents gave her away in marriage, yes, 

to a Samian man, and a haul of gifts they got. 

But her mother decked me out in cloak and shirt, 

good clothing she wrapped about me — gave me sandals, 

sent me here, this farm. She loved me from the heart. 

Oh how 1 miss her kindness now! The happy gods 

speed the work that 1 labor at, that gives me 

food and drink to spare for the ones 1 value. 

But from Queen Penelope 1 never get a thing, 

never a winning word, no friendly gesture, 

not since this, this plague has hit the house — 

these high and mighty suitors. Servants miss it, 

terribly, gossiping back and forth with the mistress, 

gathering scraps of news, a snack and a cup or two, 

then taking home to the fields some little gift. 

It never fails to cheer a servant's heart." 

"Imagine that," his canny master said, 
"you must have been just a little fellow, Eumaeus, 
when you were swept so far from home and parents. 
Come, tell me the whole story, truly too. 
Was your city sacked? — 
some city filled with people and wide streets 
where your father and your mother made their home? 
Or were you all alone, herding your sheep and cattle, 
when pirates kidnapped, shipped and sold you off 
to this man's house, who paid a healthy price?" 

"My friend," the swineherd answered, foreman of men, 
"you really want my story? So many questions — ^well, 
listen in quiet, then, and take your ease, sit back 



and drink your wine. The nights are endless now. 

We've plenty of time to sleep or savor a long tale. 

No need, you know, to turn in before the hour. 

Even too much sleep can be a bore. 

But anyone else who feels the urge 

can go to bed and then, at the crack of dawn, 

break bread, turn out and tend our master's pigs. 

We two will keep to the shelter here, eat and drink 

and take some joy in each other 's heartbreaking sorrows, 

sharing each other's memories. Over the years, you know, 

a man finds solace even in old sorrows, true, a man 

who's weathered many blows and wandered many miles. 

My own story? This will answer all your questions ... 

There's an island, Sy rie — you may have heard of it — 
off above Ortygia, where the sun wheels around. 
Not so packed with people, still a good place, though, 
fine for sheep and cattle, rich in wine and wheat. 
Hunger never attacks the land, no sickness either, 
that always stalks the lives of us poor men. 
No, as each generation grows old on the island, 
down Apollo comes with his silver bow, with Artemis, 
and they shoot them all to death with gentle arrows. 
Two cities there are, that split the land in half, 
and over them both my father ruled in force — 
Or menus' son Ctesius, a man like a deathless god. 

One day 

a band of Phoenicians landed there. The famous sea-dogs, 

sharp bargainers too, the holds of their black ship 

brimful with a hoard of flashy baubles. Now, 

my father kept a Phoenician woman in his house, 

beautiful, tall and skilled at weaving lovely things, 

and her rascal countrymen lusted to seduce her, yes, 

and lost no time — she was washing clothes when one of them 

waylaid her beside their ship, in a long deep embrace 

that can break a woman's will, even the best alive. 

And then he asked her questions ... 

her name, who was she, where did she come from? 



She waved at once to my father's high-roofed house — 
'But I'm proud to hail from Sidon paved in bronze,' she said, 
'and Ary has was my father, a man who rolled in wealth. 
I was heading home from the fields when Taphian pirates 
snatched me away, and they shipped and sold me here 
to this man's house. He paid a good stiff price!' 

The sailor, her secret lover, lured her on: 
'Well then, why don't you sail back home with us? — 
see your own high house, your father and mother there. 
They're still alive, and people say they're rich!' 

'Now there's a tempting offer,' she said in haste, 
'if only you sailors here would swear an oath 
you'll land me safe at home without a scratch.' 

Those were her terms, and once they vowed to keep them, 
swore their oaths they'd never do her harm, 
the woman hatched a plan: 'Now mum's the word! 
Let none of your shipmates say a thing to me, 
meeting me on the street or at the springs. 
Someone might go running off to the house 
and tell the old king — he'd think the worst, 
clap me in cruel chains and find a way to kill you. 
So keep it a secret, down deep, get on with buying 
your home cargo, quickly. But once your holds 
are loaded up with goods, then fast as you can 
you send the word to me over there at the palace. 
I'll bring you all the gold 1 can lay my hands on, 
and something else I'll give you in the bargain, 
fare for passage home ... 

I'm nurse to my master's son in the palace now — 
such a precious toddler, scampering round outside, 
always at my heels. I'll bring him aboard as well. 
Wherever you sell him off, whatever foreign parts, 
he'll fetch you quite a price!' 

Bargain struck, 
back the woman went to our lofty halls 



and the rovers stayed on with us one whole year, 
bartering, piling up big hoards in their hollow ship, 
and once their holds were loaded full for sailing 
they sent a messenger, fast, to alert the woman. 
This crafty bandit came to my father's house, 
dangling a golden choker linked with amber beads, 
and while the maids at hall and my noble mother 
kept on fondling it — dazzled, feasting their eyes 
and making bids — he gave a quiet nod to my nurse, 
he gave her the nod and slunk back to his ship. 
Grabbing my hand, she swept me through the house 
and there in the porch she came on cups and tables 
left by the latest f casters, father's men of council 
just gone off to the meeting grounds for full debate — 
and quick as a flash she snatched up three goblets, 
tucked them into her bosom, whisked them off 
and 1 tagged along, lost in all my innocence! 
The sun sank, the roads of the world grew dark 
and both on the run, we reached the bay at once 
where the swift Phoenician ship lay set to sail. 
Handing us up on board, the crewmen launched out 
on the foaming lanes and Zeus sent wind astern. 
Six whole days we sailed, six nights, nonstop, 
and then, when the god brought on the seventh day, 
Artemis showering arrows came and shot the woman — 
headfirst into the bilge she splashed like a diving tern 
and the crewmen heaved her body over, a nice treat 
for the seals and fish, but left me all alone, 
cowering, sick at heart ... 

Until, at last, 
the wind and current bore us on to Ithaca, 
here where Laertes bought me with his wealth. 
And so 1 first laid eyes on this good land." 

And royal King Odysseus answered warmly, 
"Eumaeus, so much misery! You've moved my heart, 
deeply, with your long tale — such pain, such sorrow. 
True, but look at the good fortune Zeus sends you. 



hand-in-hand with the bad. After all your toil 

you reached the house of a decent, kindly man 

who gives you all you need in meat and drink — 

he's seen to that, I'd say — 

it's a fine life you lead! Better than mine ... 

I've been drifting through cities up and down the earth 

and now I've landed here." 

So guest and host 
confided through the night until they slept, 
a little at least, not long. 
Dawn soon rose and took her golden throne. 

That hour 

Telemachus and his shipmates raised the coasts of home, 

they struck sail and lowered the mast, smartly, 

rowed her into a mooring under oars. 

Out went the bow-stones, cables fast astern, 

the crew themselves swung out in the breaking surf, 

they got a meal together and mixed some ruddy wine. 

And once they 'd put aside desire for food and drink, 

clear-headed Telemachus gave the men commands: 

"Pull our black ship round to the city now — 

I'm off to my herdsmen and my farms. By nightfall, 

once I've seen to my holdings, I'll be down in town. 

In the morning I'll give you wages for the voyage, 

a handsome feast of meat and hearty wine." 

The seer Theocly menus broke in quickly, 
"Where shall 1 go, dear boy? Of all the lords 
in rocky Ithaca, whose house shall 1 head for now? 
Or do 1 go straight to your mother's house and yours?" 

"Surely in better times," discreet Telemachus replied, 
"1 would invite you home. Our hospitality never fails, 
but now, 1 fear, it could only serve you poorly. 
I'll be away, and mother would never see you. 
She rarely appears these days, 
what with those suitors milling in the hall; 
she keeps to her upper story, weaving at her loom. 



But I'll mention someone else you might just visit: 
Eurymachus, wise Polybus' fine, upstanding son. 
He's the man of the hour! Our island people 
look on him like a god — the prince of suitors, 
hottest to wed my mother, seize my father's powers. 
But god knows — Zeus up there in his bright Olympus — 
whether or not before that wedding day arrives 
he'll bring the day of death on all their heads! ' 

At his last words a bird flew past on the right, 
a hawk, Apollo's wind-swift herald — tight in his claws 
a struggling dove, and he ripped its feathers out 
and they drifted down to earth between the ship 
and the young prince himself ... 
The prophet called him aside, clear of his men, 
and grasped his hand, exclaiming, "Look, Telemachus, 
the will of god just winged that bird on your right! 
Why, the moment 1 saw it, here before my eyes, 
1 knew it was a sign. No line more kingly than yours 
in all of Ithaca — yours^Ni\\ reign forever!" 

"If only, friend," 
alert Telemachus answered, "all you say comes true! 
You'd soon know my affection, know my gifts. 
Any man you meet would call you blest." 

He turned to a trusted friend and said, "Piraeus, 
son of Clytius, you are the one who's done my bidding, 
more than all other friends who sailed with me to Pylos. 
Please, take this guest of mine to your own house, 
treat him kindly, host him with all good will 
till 1 can come myself." 

"Of course, Telemachus," 
Piraeus the gallant spearman offered warmly: 
"Stay up-country just as long as you like. 
I'll tend the man, he'll never lack a lodging. " 

Piraeus boarded ship and told the crew 
to embark at once and cast off cables quickly — 



they swung aboard and sat to the oars in ranks. 

Telemachus fastened rawhide sandals on his feet 

and took from the decks his rugged bronze-tipped spear. 

The men cast off, pushed out and pulled for town 

as Telemachus ordered, King Odysseus' son. 

The prince strode out briskly, 

legs speeding him on till he reached the farm 

where his great droves of pigs crowded their pens 

and the loyal swineherd often slept beside them, 

always the man to serve his masters well. 



 



Father and Son 



As dawn came into the lodge, the king and loyal swineherd 
set out breakfast, once they had raked the fire up 
and got the herdsmen off with droves of pigs. 
And now Telemachus ... 

the howling dogs went nuzzling up around him, 
not a growl as he approached. From inside 
Odysseus noticed the pack's quiet welcome, 
noticed the light tread of footsteps too 
and turned to Eumaeus quickly, winged a word: 
"Eumaeus, here comes a friend of yours, I'd say. 
Someone you know, at least. The pack's not barking, 
must be fawning around him. 1 can hear his footfall." 

The words were still on his lips when his own son 
stood in the doorway, there. The swineherd started up. 



amazed, he dropped the bowls with a clatter — he'd been busy 

mixing ruddy wine. Straight to the prince he rushed 

and kissed his face and kissed his shining eyes, 

both hands, as the tears rolled down his cheeks. 

As a father, brimming with love, welcomes home 

his darling only son in a warm embrace — 

what pain he's borne for him and him alone! — 

home now, in the tenth year from far abroad, 

so the loyal swineherd hugged the beaming prince, 

he clung for dear life, covering him with kisses, yes, 

like one escaped from death. Eumaeus wept and sobbed, 

his words flew from the heart: "You're home, Telemachus, 

sweet light of my eyes! 1 never thought I'd see you again, 

once you'd shipped to Pylos! Quick, dear boy, come in, 

let me look at you, look to my heart's content — 

under my own roof, the rover home at last. 

You rarely visit the farm and men these days, 

always keeping to town, as if it cheered ^ou 

to see them there, that infernal crowd of suitors! " 

"Have it your way," thoughtful Telemachus replied. 
"Dear old man, it's all for youXhaA. I've come, 
to see you for myself and learn the news — 
whether mother still holds out in the halls 
or some other man has married her at last, 
and Odysseus' bed, 1 suppose, is lying empty, 
blanketed now with filthy cobwebs." 

"Surely," 

the foreman of men responded, "she's still waiting 
there in your halls, poor woman, suffering so, 
her life an endless hardship ... 
wasting away the nights, weeping away the days." 

With that 

he took the bronze spear from the boy, and Telemachus, 
crossing the stone doorsill, went inside the lodge. 
As he approached, his father, Odysseus, rose 
to yield his seat, but the son on his part 
waved him back: "Stay where you are, stranger. 



I know we can find another seat somewhere, 
here on our farm, and here's the man to fetch it." 

So Odysseus, moving back, sat down once more, 
and now for the prince the swineherd strewed a bundle 
of fresh green brushwood, topped it off with sheepskin 
and there the true son of Odysseus took his place. 
Eumaeus set before them platters of roast meat, 
left from the meal he'd had the day before; 
he promptly served them bread, heaped in baskets, 
mixed their hearty wine in a wooden bowl 
and then sat down himself to face the king. 
They reached for the good things that lay at hand, 
and when they 'd put aside desire for food and drink 
Telemachus asked his loyal serving-man at last, 
"Old friend, where does this stranger come from? 
Why did the sailors land him here in Ithaca? 
Who did they say they are? 
1 hardly think he came this way on foot." 

You answered him, Eumaeus, loyal swineherd, 
"Here, my boy, I'll tell you the whole true story. 
He hails from Crete's broad land, he's proud to say, 
but he claims he's drifted round through countless towns of 
roaming the earth ... so a god's spun out his fate. 
He just now broke away from some Thesprotian ship 
and came to my farm. I'll put him in yourhands, 
you tend to him as you like. 
He counts on you, he says, for care and shelter." 

"Shelter? Oh Eumaeus," Telemachus replied, 
"that word of yours, it cuts me to the quick! 
How can 1 lend the stranger refuge in my house? 
I'm young myself. 1 can hardly trust my hands 
to fight off any man who rises up against me. 
Then my mother's wavering, always torn two ways: 
whether to stay with me and care for the household, 
true to her husband's bed, the people's voice as well. 



or leave at long last with the best man in Achaea 

who courts her in the halls, who offers her the most. 

But our new guest, since he's arrived at your house, 

I'll give him a shirt and cloak to wear, good clothing, 

give him a two-edged sword and sandals for his feet 

and send him off, wherever his heart desires. 

Or if you'd rather, keep him here at the farmstead, 

tend to him here, and I'll send up the clothes 

and full rations to keep the man in food; 

he'll be no drain on you and all your men. 

But 1 can't let him go down and join the suitors. 

They're far too abusive, reckless, know no limits: 

they 'll make a mockery of him — that would break my heart. 

It's hard for a man to win his way against a mob, 

even a man of iron. They are much too strong. " 

"Friend " — the long-enduring Odysseus stepped in — 
"surely it's right for me to say a word at this point. 
My heart, by god, is torn to pieces hearing this, 
both of you telling how these reckless suitors, 
there in your own house, against your will, 
plot your ruin — a fine young prince like you. 
Tell me, though, do you /e/^yourself be so abused 
or do people round about, stirred up by the prompting 
of some god, despise you? Or are your brothers at fault? 
Brothers a man can trust to fight beside him, true, 
no matter what deadly blood-feud rages on. 
Would 1 were young as you, to match my spirit now, 
or 1 were the son of great Odysseus, or the king himself 
returned from all his roving — ^there's still room for hope! 
Then let some foreigner lop my head off if 1 failed 
to march right into Odysseus' royal halls 
and kill them all. And what if 1 went down, 
crushed by their numbers — 1, fighting alone? 
I'd rather die, cut down in my own house 
than have to look on at their outrage day by day. 
Guests treated to blows, men dragging the serving-women 
through the noble house, exploiting them all, no shame. 



and the gushing wine swilled, the food squandered — 

gorging for gorging's sake — 

and the courting game goes on, no end in sight! " 

"You're right, my friend, " sober Telemachus agreed. 
"Now let me tell you the whole story, first to last. 
It's not that allom people have turned against me, 
keen for a showdown. Nor have 1 any brothers at fault, 
brothers a man can trust to fight beside him, true, 
no matter what deadly blood-feud rages on ... 
Zeus made our line a line of only sons. 
Arcesius had only one son, Laertes, 
and Laertes had only one son, Odysseus, 
and 1 am Odysseus' only son. He fathered me, 
he left me behind at home, and from me he got no joy. 
So now our house is plagued by swarms of enemies. 
All the nobles who rule the islands round about, 
Dulichion, and Same, and wooded Zacynthus too, 
and all who lord it in rocky Ithaca as well — 
down to the last man they court my mother, 
they lay waste my house! And mother ... 
she neither rejects a marriage she despises 
nor can she bear to bring the courting to an end — 
while they continue to bleed my household white. 
Soon — you wait — ^they'll grind /nedown as well! 
But all lies in the lap of the great gods. 

Eumaeus, 

good old friend, go, quickly, to wise Penelope. 
Tell her I'm home from Pylos safe and sound. 
I'll stay on right here. But you come back 
as soon as you've told the news to her alone. 
No other Achaean must hear — 
all too many plot to take my life." 

"Iknow," 

you assured your prince, Eumaeus, loyal swineherd. 
"1 see your point — ^there's sense in this old head. 
One thing more, and make your orders clear. 



On the same trip do I go and give the news 

to King Laertes too? For many years, poor man, 

heartsick for his son, he'd always keep an eye 

on the farm and take his meals with the hired hands 

whenever he felt the urge to. Now, from the day 

you sailed away to Pylos, not a sip or a bite 

he's touched, they say, not as he did before, 

and his eyes are shut to all the farmyard labors. 

Huddled over, groaning in grief and tears, 

he wastes away — the man's all skin and bones. ' 

"So much the worse, ' Telemachus answered firmly. 
"Leave him alone; though it hurts us now, we must. 
If men could have all they want, free for the taking, 
/(c/take first my father's journey home. So, 
you go and give the message, then come back, 
no roaming over the fields to find Laertes. 
Tell my mother to send her housekeeper, 
fast as she can, in secret — 
she can give the poor old man the news." 

That roused Eumaeus. The swineherd grasped his sandals, 
strapped them onto his feet and made for town. 
His exit did not escape Athena's notice ... 
Approaching, closer, now she appeared a woman, 
beautiful, tall and skilled at weaving lovely things. 
Just at the shelter's door she stopped, visible to Odysseus 
but Telemachus could not see her, sense her there — 
the gods don't show themselves to every man alive. 
Odysseus saw her, so did the dogs; no barking now, 
they whimpered, cringing away in terror through the yard. 
She gave a sign with her brows, Odysseus caught it, 
out of the lodge he went and past the high stockade 
and stood before the goddess. Athena urged him on: 
"Royal son of Laertes, Odysseus, old campaigner, 
now is the time, now tell your son the truth. 
Hold nothing back, so the two of you can plot 



the suitors' doom and then set out for town. 
I myself won't lag behind you long — 
I'm blazing for a battle!" 

Athena stroked him with her golden wand. 
First she made the cloak and shirt on his body 
fresh and clean, then made him taller, supple, young, 
his ruddy tan came back, the cut of his jawline firmed 
and the dark beard clustered black around his chin. 
Her work complete, she went her way once more 
and Odysseus returned to the lodge. His own son 
gazed at him, wonderstruck, terrified too, turning 
his eyes away, suddenly — 

this must be some god — 
and he let fly with a burst of exclamations: 
"Friend, you're a new man — not what 1 saw before! 
Your clothes, they've changed, even your skin has changed — 
surely you are some god who rules the vaulting skies! 
Oh be kind, and we will give you offerings, 
gifts of hammered gold to warm your heart — 
spare us, please, 1 beg you!" 

"No, lam not a god," 
the long-enduring, great Odysseus returned. 
"Why confuse me with one who never dies? 
No, 1 am your father — 
the Odysseus you wept for all your days, 
you bore a world of pain, the cruel abuse of men." 

And with those words Odysseus kissed his son 
and the tears streamed down his cheeks and wet the ground, 
though before he'd always reined his emotions back. 
But still not convinced that it was his father, 
Telemachus broke out, wild with disbelief, 
"No, you're not Odysseus! Not my father! 
Just some spirit spellbinding me now — 
to make me ache with sorrow all the more. 
Impossible for a mortal to work such marvels, 
not with his own devices, not unless some god 



comes down in person, eager to make that mortal 
young or old — like that! Why, just now 
you were old, and wrapped in rags, but now, look, 
you seem like a god who rules the skies up there!" 

"Telemachus, " Odysseus, man of exploits, urged his son, 
"it's wrong to marvel, carried away in wonder so 
at sight of your father here before your eyes. 
No other Odysseus will ever return to you. 
That man and 1 are one, the man you see ... 
here after many hardships, 
endless wanderings, after twenty years 
1 have come home to native ground at last. 
My changing so? Athena's work, the Fighter 's Queen — 
she has that power, she makes me look as she likes, 
now like a beggar, the next moment a young man, 
decked out in handsome clothes about my body. 
It's light work for the gods who rule the skies 
to exalt a mortal man or bring him low. " 

At that 

Odysseus sat down again, and Telemachus threw his arms 
around his great father, sobbing uncontrollably 
as the deep desire for tears welled up in both. 
They cried out, shrilling cries, pulsing sharper 
than birds of prey — eagles, vultures with hooked claws — 
when farmers plunder their nest of young too young to fly. 
Both men so filled with compassion, eyes streaming tears, 
that now the sunlight would have set upon their cries 
if Telemachus had not asked his father, all at once, 
"What sort of ship, dear father, brought you here? — 
Ithaca, at last. Who did the sailors say they are? 
1 hardly think you came back home on foot!" 

So long an exile, great Odysseus replied, 
"Surely, my son, I'll tell you the whole story now. 
Phaeacians brought me here, the famous sailors 
who ferry home all men who reach their shores. 
They sailed me across the sea in their swift ship. 



they set me down in Ithaca, sound asleep, and gave me 
glittering gifts — bronze and hoards of gold and robes. 
All lie stowed in a cave, thanks to the gods' help, 
and Athena's inspiration spurred me here, now, 
so we could plan the slaughter of our foes. 
Come, give me the full tally of these suitors — 
1 must see their numbers, gauge their strength. 
Then I'll deploy this old tactician's wits, 
decide if the two of us can take them on, 
alone, without allies, 

or we should hunt reserves to back us up." 

"Father," 

clear-headed Telemachus countered quickly, 

"all my life I've heard of your great fame — 

a brave man in war and a deep mind in counsel — 

but what you say dumbfounds me, staggers imagination! 

How on earth could two men fight so many and so strong? 

These suitors are not just ten or twenty, they're far more — 

you count them up for yourself now, take a moment ... 

From Dulichion, fifty -two of them, picked young men, 

six servants in their troop; from Same, twenty-four, 

from Zacynthus, twenty Achaeans, nobles all, 

and the twelve best lords from Ithaca itself. 

Medon the herald's with them, a gifted bard, 

and two henchmen, skilled to carve their meat. 

If we pit ourselves against all these in the house, 

1 fear the revenge you come back home to take 

will recoil on our heads — a bitter, deadly blow. 

Think: can you come up with a friend-in-arms? 

Some man to fight beside us, some brave heart?" 

"Let me tell you," the old soldier said, 
"bear it in mind now, listen to me closely. 
Think:^N\\\ Athena flanked by Father Zeus 
do for the two of us? 

Or shall 1 rack my brains for another champion?" 
Telemachus answered shrewdly, full of poise. 



"Two great champions, those you name, it's true. 

Off in the clouds they sit 

and they lord it over gods and mortal men. " 

"Trust me, " his seasoned father reassured him, 
" tIley^Non't hold off long from the cries and clash of battle, 
not when we and the suitors put our fighting strength 
to proof in my own halls! But now, with daybreak, 
home you go and mix with that overbearing crowd. 
The swineherd will lead me into the city later, 
looking old and broken, a beggar once again. 
If they abuse me in the palace, steel yourself, 
no matter what outrage 1 must suffer, even 
if they drag me through our house by the heels 
and throw me out or pelt me with things they hurl — 
you just look on, endure it. Prompt them to quit 
their wild reckless ways, try to win them over 
with friendly words. Those men will never listen, 
now the day of doom is hovering at their heads. 
One more thing. Take it to heart, 1 urge you. 
When Athena, Queen of Tactics, tells me it is time, 
I'll give you a nod, and when you catch that signal 
round up all the deadly weapons kept in the hall, 
stow them away upstairs in a storeroom's deep recess — 
all the arms and armor — and when the suitors miss them 
and ask you questions, put them off with a winning story: 
'1 stowed them away, clear of the smoke. A far cry 
from the arms Odysseus left when he went to Troy, 
fire-damaged equipment, black with reeking fumes. 
And a god reminded me of something darker too. 
When you're in your cups a quarrel might break out, 
you'd wound each other, shame your feasting here 
and cast a pall on your courting. 
Iron has powers to draw a man to ruin.' 

Just you leave 
a pair of swords for the two of us, a pair of spears 
and a pair of oxhide bucklers right at hand so we 
can break for the weapons, seize them! Then Athena, 



Zeus in his wisdom — they will daze the suitors' wits. 
Now one last thing. Bear it in mind. You must. 
If you are my own true son, born of my blood, 
let no one hear that Odysseus has come home. 
Don't let Laertes know, not Eumaeus either, 
none in the household, not Penelope herself. 
You and 1 alone will assess the women's mood 
and we might test a few of the serving-men as well: 
where are the ones who still respect us both, 
who hold us in awe? And who shirk their duties? — 
slighting you because you are so young." 

"Soon enough, father, " his gallant son replied, 
"you'll sense the courage inside me, that 1 know — 
I'm hardly a flighty, weak-willed boy these days. 
But 1 think your last plan would gain us nothing. 
Reconsider, 1 urge you. 

You'll waste time, roaming around our holdings, 

probing the fieldhands man by man, while the suitors 

sit at ease in our house, devouring all our goods — 

those brazen rascals never spare a scrap! 

But 1 do advise you to sound the women out: 

who are disloyal to you, who are guiltless? 

The men — 1 say no to testing them farm by farm. 

That's work for later, if you have really seen 

a sign from Zeus whose shield is storm and thunder. " 

Now as father and son conspired, shaping plans, 
the ship that brought the prince and shipmates back 
from Pylos was just approaching Ithaca, home port. 
As soon as they put in to the harbor's deep bay 
they hauled the black vessel up onto dry land 
and eager deckhands bore away their gear 
and rushed the priceless gifts to Clytius' house. 
But they sent a herald on to Odysseus' halls at once 
to give the news to thoughtful, cautious Penelope 
that Telemachus was home— just up-country now, 
but he'd told his mates to sail across to port — 



so the noble queen would not be seized with fright 
and break down in tears. And now those two men met, 
herald and swineherd, both out on the same errand, 
to give the queen the news. But once they reached 
the house of the royal king the herald strode up, 
into the serving-women's midst, and burst out, 
"Your beloved son, my queen, is home at last!" 
Eumaeus though, bending close to Penelope, 
whispered every word that her dear son 
entrusted him to say. Message told in full, 
he left the halls and precincts, heading for his pigs. 

But the news shook the suitors, dashed their spirits. 
Out of the halls they crowded, past the high-walled court 
and there before the gates they sat in council. 
Poly bus' son Eurymachus opened up among them: 
"Friends, what a fine piece of work he's carried off! 
Telemachus — what insolence — and we thought his little jaunt 
would come to grief! Up now, launch a black ship, 
the best we can find — muster a crew of oarsmen, 
row the news to our friends in ambush, fast, 
bring them back at once. " 

And just then — 
he'd not quite finished when Amphinomus, 
wheeling round in his seat, 
saw their vessel moored in the deep harbor, 
their comrades striking sail and hoisting oars. 
He broke into heady laughter, called his friends: 
"No need for a message now. They're home, look there! 
Some god gave them the news, or they saw the prince's ship 
go sailing past and failed to overtake her." 

Rising, all trooped down to the water's edge 
as the crew hauled the vessel up onto dry land 
and the hot-blooded hands bore off their gear. 
Then in a pack they went to the meeting grounds, 
suffering no one else, young or old, to sit among them. 
Eupithes' son Antinous rose and harangued them all: 



"What a blow! See how the gods have saved this boy 

from bloody death? And our lookouts all day long, 

stationed atop the windy heights, kept watch, 

shift on shift; and once the sun went down 

we'd never sleep the night ashore, never, 

always aboard our swift ship, cruising till dawn, 

patrolling to catch Telemachus, kill him on the spot, 

and all the while some spirit whisked him home! 

So here at home^Ne'\\ plot his certain death: 

he must never slip through our hands again, 

that boy — while he still lives, 

1 swear we'll never bring our venture off. 

The clever little schemer, he does have his skills, 

and the crowds no longer show us favor, not at all. 

So act! before he can gather his people in assembly. 

He'll never give in an inch, 1 know, he'll rise 

and rage away, shouting out to them all how we, 

we schemed his sudden death but never caught him. 

Hearing of our foul play, they'll hardly sing our praises. 

Why, they might do us damage, run us off our lands, 

drive us abroad to hunt for strangers' shores. 

Strike first, 1 say, and kill him! — 

clear of town, in the fields or on the road. 

Then we'll seize his estates and worldly goods, 

carve them up between us, share and share alike. 

But as for his palace, let his mother keep it, 

she and the man she weds. 

There's my plan. 
If you find it offensive, if you want him 
living on — in full command of his patrimony — 
gather here no more then, living the life of kings, 
consuming all his wealth. Each from his own house 
must try to win her, showering her with gifts- 
Then she can marry the one who offers most, 
the man marked out by fate to be her husband." 

That brought them all to a hushed, stunned silence 
till Amphinomus rose to have his say among them — 



the noted son of Nisus, King Aretias' grandson, 
the chief who led the suitors from DuUchion, 
land of grass and grains, 
and the man who pleased Penelope the most, 
thanks to his timely words and good clear sense. 
Concerned for their welfare now, he stood and argued: 
"Friends, I've no desire to kill Telemachus, not 1 — 
it's a terrible thing to shed the blood of kings. 
Wait, sound out the will of the gods — that first. 
If the decrees of mighty Zeus commend the work, 
I'll kill the prince myself and spur on all the rest. 
If the gods are against it, then 1 say hold back!" 

So Amphinomus urged, and won them over. 
They rose at once, returned to Odysseus' palace, 
entered and took their seats on burnished chairs. 

But now an inspiration took the discreet Penelope 
to face her suitors, brutal, reckless men. 
The queen had heard it all ... 
how they plotted inside the house to kill her son. 
The herald Medon told her — he'd overheard their schemes. 
And so, flanked by her ladies, she descended to the hall. 
That luster of women, once she reached her suitors, 
drawing her glistening veil across her cheeks, 
paused now where a column propped the sturdy roof 
and wheeling on Antinous, cried out against him: 
"You, Antinous! Violent, vicious, scheming — 
you, they say, are the best man your age in Ithaca, 
best for eloquence, counsel. You're nothing of the sort! 
Madman, why do you weave destruction for Telemachus? — 
show no pity to those who need it? — ^those over whom 
almighty Zeus stands guard. It's wrong, unholy, yes, 
weaving death for those who deserve your mercy! 
Don't you know how your fatAerfied here once? 
A fugitive, terrified of the people, up in arms 
against him because he'd joined some Taphian pirates 
out to attack Thesprotians, sworn allies of ours. 



The mobs were set to destroy him, rip his hfe out, 

devour his vast wealth to their heart's content, 

but Odysseus held them back, he kept their fury down. 

And thisis the man whose house you waste, scot-free, 

whose wife you court, whose son you mean to kill — 

you make my life an agony! Stop, 1 tell you, 

stop all this, and make the rest stop too!" 

But Polybus' son Eurymachus tried to calm her: 
"Wise Penelope, daughter of Icarius, courage! 
Disabuse yourself of all these worries now. 
That man is not alive — 
he never will be, he never can be born — 
who'll lift a hand against Telemachus, your son, 
not while /walk the land and 1 can see the light. 
1 tell you this — so help me, it will all come true — 
in an instant that man's blood will spurt around my spear! 
Mz/ spear, since time and again Odysseus dandled me 
on his knees, the great raider of cities fed me 
roasted meat and held the red wine to my lips. 
So to /neyour son is the dearest man alive, 
and 1 urge the boy to have no fear of death, 
not from the suitors at least. 

What comes from the gods — ^there's no escaping that." 

Encouraging, all the way, but all the while 
plotting the prince's murder in his mind ... 
The queen, going up to her lofty well-lit room, 
fell to weeping for Odysseus, her beloved husband, 
till watchful Athena sealed her eyes with welcome sleep. 

Returning just at dusk to Odysseus and his son, 
the loyal swineherd found they'd killed a yearling pig 
and standing over it now were busy fixing supper. 
But Athena had approached Laertes' son Odysseus, 
tapped him with her wand and made him old again. 
She dressed him in filthy rags too, for fear Eumaeus, 
recognizing his master face-to-face, might hurry 



back to shrewd Penelope, blurting out the news 
and never hide the secret in his heart. 

Telemachus was the first to greet the swineherd: 
"Welcome home, my friend! What's the talk in town? 
Are the swaggering suitors back from ambush yet — 
or still waiting to catch me coming home?" 

You answered the prince, Eumaeus, loyal swineherd, 
"1 had no time to go roaming all through town, 
digging round for that. My heart raced me on 
to get my message told and rush back here. 
But 1 met up with a fast runner there, 
sent by your crew, a herald, 
first to tell your mother all the news. 
And this 1 know, 1 saw with my own eyes — 
1 was just above the city, heading home, 
clambering over Hermes' Ridge, when 1 caught sight 
of a trim ship pulling into the harbor, loaded down 
with a crowd aboard her, shields and two-edged spears. 
1 thinkXhe^'TQ the men you're after — I'm not sure." 

At that the young prince Telemachus smiled, 
glancing toward his father, avoiding Eumaeus' eyes. 

And now, 

with the roasting done, the meal set out, they ate well 
and no one's hunger lacked a proper share of supper. 
When they'd put aside desire for food and drink, 
they remembered bed and took the gift of sleep. 



 



Stranger at 
the Gates 

when young Dawn with her rose-red fingers shone once more 

Telemachus strapped his rawhide sandals to his feet 

and the young prince, the son of King Odysseus, 

picked up the rugged spear that fit his grip 

and striking out for the city, told his swineherd, 

"I'm off to town, old friend, to present myself to mother. 

She'll never stop her bitter tears and mourning, 

well 1 know, till she sees me face-to-face. 

And for you 1 have some orders — 

take this luckless stranger to town, so he can beg 

his supper there, and whoever wants can give the man 

some crumbs and a cup to drink. How can /put up with 

every passerby? My mind's weighed down with troubles. 

If the stranger resents it, all the worse for him. 

1 like to tell the truth and tell it straight." 



"My friend, 

subtle Odysseus broke in, "I've no desire, myself, 

to linger here. Better that beggars cadge their meals 

in town than in the fields. Some willing soul 

will see to my needs. I'm hardly fit, at my age, 

to keep to a farm and jump to a foreman's every order. 

Go on then. This man will take me, as you've told him, 

once I'm warm from the fire and the sun's good and strong. 

Look at the clothing on my back — all rags and tatters. 

I'm afraid the frost at dawn could do me in, 

and town, you say, is a long hard way from here." 

At that Telemachus strode down through the farm 
in quick, firm strides, brooding death for the suitors. 
And once he reached his well-constructed palace, 
propping his spear against a sturdy pillar 
and crossing the stone threshold, in he went. 

His old nurse was the first to see him, Eurycleia, 
just spreading fleeces over the carved, inlaid chairs. 
Tears sprang to her eyes, she rushed straight to the prince 
as the other maids of great Odysseus flocked around him, 
hugged him warmly, kissed his head and shoulders. 

Now down from her chamber came discreet Penelope, 
looking for all the world like Artemis or golden Aphrodite — 
bursting into tears as she flung her arms around her darling son 
and kissed his face and kissed his shining eyes and sobbed, 
"You're home, Telemachus!" — ^words flew from her heart — 
"sweet light of my eyes! 1 never thought I'd see you again, 
once you shipped to Pylos — against my will, so secret, 
out for news of your dear father. Quick tell me, 
did you catch sight of the man — meet him — ^what?" 

"Please, mother," steady Telemachus replied, 
"don't move me to tears, don't stir the heart inside me. 
I've just escaped from death. Sudden death. 
No. Bathe now, put on some fresh clothes. 



go up to your own room with your serving-women, 

pray, and promise the gods a generous sacrifice 

to bring success, if Zeus will ever grant us 

the hour of our revenge. I myself am off 

to the meeting grounds to summon up a guest 

who came with me from abroad when 1 sailed home. 

1 sent him on ahead with my trusted crew. 

1 told Piraeus to take him to his house, 

treat him well, host him with all good will 

till 1 could come myself." 

Words to the mark 
that left his mother silent ... 
She bathed now, put on some fresh clothes, 
prayed, and promised the gods a generous sacrifice 
to bring success, if Zeus would ever grant 
the hour of their revenge. 

Spear in hand, 
Telemachus strode on through the hall and out, 
and a pair of sleek hounds went trotting at his heels. 
And Athena lavished a marvelous splendor on the prince 
so the people all gazed in wonder as he came forward. 
The swaggering suitors clustered, milling round him, 
welcome words on their lips, and murder in their hearts. 
But he gave them a wide berth as they came crowding in 
and there where Mentor sat, Antiphus, Halitherses too — 
his father's loyal friends from the early days — 
he took his seat as they pressed him with their questions. 
And just then Piraeus the gallant spearman approached, 
leading the stranger through the town and out onto 
the meeting grounds. Telemachus, not hanging back, 
went right up to greet Theoclymenus, his guest, 
but Piraeus spoke out first: "Quickly now, 
Telemachus, send some women to my house 
to retrieve the gifts that Menelaus gave you." 

"Wait, Piraeus," wary Telemachus cautioned, 
"we've no idea how all of this will go. 



If the brazen suitors cut me down in the palace — 
off guard — and carve apart my father's whole estate, 
I'd rather you yourself, or one of his friends here, 
keep those gifts and get some pleasure from them. 
But if 1 can bring down slaughter on that crew, 
you send the gifts to my house — we'll share the joy." 

Their plans made, he led the wayworn stranger home 
and once they reached the well-constructed palace, 
spreading out their cloaks on a chair or bench, 
into the burnished tubs they climbed and bathed. 
When women had washed them, rubbed them down with oil 
and drawn warm fleece and shirts around their shoulders, 
out of the baths they stepped and sat on high-backed chairs. 
A maid brought water soon in a graceful golden pitcher 
and over a silver basin tipped it out 
so they might rinse their hands, 
then pulled a gleaming table to their side. 
A staid housekeeper brought on bread to serve them, 
appetizers aplenty too, lavish with her bounty. 
Penelope sat across from her son, beside a pillar, 
leaning back on a low chair and winding finespun yarn. 
They reached out for the good things that lay at hand 
and when they'd put aside desire for food and drink, 
the queen, for all her composure, said at last, 
"Telemachus, I'm going back to my room upstairs 
and lie down on my bed ... 
that bed of pain my tears have streaked, year in, 
year out, from the day Odysseus sailed away to Troy 
with Atreus' two sons. 

But you, you never had the heart — 
before those insolent suitors crowd back to the house — 
to tell me clearly about your father's journey home, 
if you've heard any news." 

"Of course, mother," 
thoughtful Telemachus reassured her quickly, 
"1 will tell you the whole true story now. 



We sailed to Pylos, to Nestor, the great king, 

and he received me there in his lofty palace, 

treated me well and warmly, yes, as a father treats 

a long-lost son just home from voyaging, years abroad: 

such care he showered on me, he and his noble sons. 

But of strong, enduring Odysseus, dead or alive, 

he's heard no news, he said, from any man on earth. 

He sent me on to the famous spearman Atrides Menelaus, 

on with a team of horses drawing a bolted chariot. 

And there 1 saw her, Helen of Argos — all for her 

Achaeans and Trojans suffered so much hardship, 

thanks to the gods' decree ... 

The lord of the warcry , Menelaus, asked at once 

what pressing need had brought me to lovely Lacedaemon, 

and when 1 told him the whole story, first to last, 

the king burst out, 'How shameful! That's the bed 

of a brave man of war they'd like to crawl inside, 

those spineless, craven cowards! 

Weak as the doe that beds down her fawns 

in a mighty lion's den — her newborn sucklings — 

then trails off to the mountain spurs and grassy bends 

to graze her fill, but back the lion comes to his own lair 

and the master deals both fawns a ghastly bloody death, 

just what Odysseus will deal that mob — ghastly death. 

Ah if only — Father Zeus, Athena and lord Apollo — 

that man who years ago in the games at Lesbos 

rose to Philomelides' challenge, wrestled him, 

pinned him down with one tremendous throw 

and the Argives roared with joy ... 

if only ^Aa^ Odysseus sported with those suitors, 

a blood wedding, a quick death would take the lot! 

But about the things you've asked me, so intently, 

I'll skew and sidestep nothing, not deceive you, ever. 

Of all Aetold me — ^the Old Man of the Sea who never lies — 

I'll hide or hold back nothing, not a single word. 

He said he'd seen Odysseus on an island, 

ground down in misery, off in a goddess' house, 



the nymph Calypso, who holds him there by force. 
He has no way to voyage home to his own native land, 
no trim ships in reach, no crew to ply the oars 
and send him scudding over the sea's broad back.' 

So Menelaus, the famous spearman, told me. 
My mission accomplished, back 1 came at once, 
and the gods sent me a stiff following wind 
that sped me home to the native land 1 love. ' 

His reassurance stirred the queen to her depths 
and the godUke seer Theocly menus added firmly, 
"Noble lady, wife of Laertes' son, Odysseus, 
Menelaus can have no perfect revelations; 
mark myyNords — 1 will make you a prophecy, 
quite precise, and /U hold nothing back. 
1 swear by Zeus, the first of all the gods, 
by this table of hospitality here, my host, 
by Odysseus' hearth where 1 have come for help — 
1 swear Odysseus Js on native soil, here and now! 
Poised or on the prowl, learning of these rank crimes 
he's sowing seeds of ruin for all your suitors. 
So clear, so true, that bird-sign 1 saw 
as 1 sat on the benched ship 
and sounded out the future to the prince!" 

"If only, my friend," reserved Penelope exclaimed, 
"everything you say would come to pass! 
You'd soon know my affection, know my gifts. 
Any man you meet would call you blest." 

And so the three confided in the halls 
while all the suitors, before Odysseus' palace, 
amused themselves with discus and long throwing spears, 
out on the leveled grounds, free and easy as always, 
full of swagger. When the dinner-hour approached 
and sheep came home from pastures near and far. 



driven in by familiar drovers, 

Medon called them all, their favorite herald, 

always present at their meals: "My young lords, 

now you've played your games to your hearts' content, 

come back to the halls so we can fix your supper. 

Nothing's better than dining well on time!" 

They came at his summons, rising from the games 
and now, bustling into the well-constructed palace, 
flinging down their cloaks on a chair or bench, 
they butchered hulking sheep and fatted goats, 
full-grown hogs and a young cow from the herd, 
preparing for their feast. 

At the same time 
the king and his loyal swineherd geared to leave 
the country for the town. Eumaeus, foreman of men, 
set things in motion: "Friend, 1 know you're keen 
on going down to town today , just as my master bid, 
though I'd rather you stay here to guard the farm. 
But 1 prize the boy, 1 fear he'll blame me later — 
a dressing-down from your master's hard to bear. 
So off we go now. The shank of the day is past. 
You'll find it colder with nightfall coming on." 

"1 know, 1 see your point," the crafty man replied. 
"There's sense in this old head. So let's be off. 
And from now on, you lead me all the way. 
Just give me a stick to lean on, 
if you have one ready-cut. You say the road 
is treacherous, full of slips and slides." 

With that 

he flung his beggar's sack across his shoulders — 
torn and tattered, slung from a fraying rope. 
Eumaeus gave him a staff that met his needs. 
Then the two moved out, leaving behind them 
dogs and herdsmen to stay and guard the farm. 
And so the servant led his master toward the city, 
looking for all the world like an old and broken beggar 



hunched on a stick, his body wrapped in shameful rags ... 

Down over the rugged road they went till hard by town 
they reached the stone-rimmed fountain running clear 
where the city people came and drew their water. 
Ithacus built it once, with Neritus and Polyctor. 
Round it a stand of poplar thrived on the dank soil, 
all in a nestling ring, and down from a rock-ledge overhead 
the cold water splashed, and crowning the fountain 
rose an altar-stone erected to the nymphs, 
where every traveler paused and left an offering. 
Here Dolius' son, Melanthius, crossed their path, 
herding his goats with a pair of drovers' help, 
the pick of his flocks to make the suitors' meal. 
As soon as he saw them there he broke into a flood 
of brutal, foul abuse that made Odysseus' blood boil. 
"Look! " — he sneered — "one scum nosing another scum along, 
dirt finds dirt by the will of god — it never fails! 
Stinking pig-boy, where do you take your filthy swine, 
this sickening beggar who licks the pots at feasts? 
Hanging round the doorposts, rubbing his back, 
scavenging after scraps, 
no hero's swords and cauldrons, not for him. 
Hand him over to me — I'll teach him to work a farm, 
muck out my stalls, pitch feed to the young goats; 
whey to drink will put some muscle on his hams! 
Oh no, he's learned his lazy ways too well, 
he's got no itch to stick to good hard work, 
he'd rather go scrounging round the countryside, 
begging for crusts to stuff his greedy gut! 
Let me tell you — so help me it's the truth — 
if he sets foot in King Odysseus' royal palace, 
salvos of footstools flung at his head by all the lords 
will crack his ribs as he runs the line of fire through the house!" 

Wild, reckless taunts — and just as he passed Odysseus 
the idiot lurched out with a heel and kicked his hip, 
but he couldn't knock the beggar off the path. 



he stood his ground so staunchly. Odysseus was torn ... 

should he wheel with his staff and beat the scoundrel senseless? — 

or hoist him by the midriff, split his skull on the rocks? 

He steeled himself instead, his mind in full control. 

But Eumaeus glared at the goatherd, cursed him to his face, 

then lifted up his hands and prayed his heart out: 

"0 nymphs of the fountain, daughters of Zeus — 

if Odysseus ever burned you the long thighs 

of lambs or kids, covered with rich fat, 

now bring my prayer to pass! 

Let that man come back — some god guide him now! 

He'd toss to the winds the flashy show you make, 

Melanthius, so cocksure — always strutting round the town 

while worthless fieldhands leave your flocks a shambles!" 

"Listen to /limf the goatherd shouted back. 
"All bark and no bite from the vicious mutt! 
One fine day I'll ship him out in a black lugger, 
miles from Ithaca — sell him off for a good stiff price! 
Just let Apollo shoot Telemachus down with his silver bow, 
today in the halls, or the suitors snuff his life out — 
as sure as 1 know the day of the king's return 
is blotted out, the king is worlds away!" 

With his parting shot he left them trudging on 
and went and reached the royal house in no time. 
Slipping in, he took his seat among the suitors, 
facing Eurymachus, who favored him the most. 
The carvers set before him his plate of meat, 
a staid housekeeper brought the man his bread. 

And now at last the king and loyal swineherd, 
drawing near the palace, halted just outside 
as the lyre's rippling music drifted round them — 
Phemius, striking up a song for assembled guests — 
and the master seized his servant's hand, exclaiming, 
"Friend, what a noble house! Odysseus 'house, it must be! 
No mistaking it — you could tell it among a townful, look. 



One building linked to the next, and the courtyard wall 
is finished off with a fine coping, the double doors 
are battle-proof — no man could break them down! 
1 can tell a crowd is feasting there in force — 
smell the savor of roasts ... the ringing lyre, listen, 
the lyre that god has made the friend of feasts. " 

"An easy guess," you said, Eumaeus, swineherd, 
"for a man as keen as you at every turn. 
Put heads together. What do we do next? 
Either you're the first one into the palace — 
mix with the suitors, leave me where 1 am. 
Or if you like, stay put, and I'll go first myself. 
Don't linger long. Someone might spot you here outside, 
knock you down or pelt you. Mark my words. Take care." 

The man who'd borne long years abroad replied, 
"Well 1 know. Remember? There's sense in this old head. 
You go in, you first, while 1 stay here behind. 
Stones and blows and 1 are hardly strangers. 
My heart is steeled by now, 
I've had my share of pain in the waves and wars. 
Add this to the total. Bring the trial on. 
But there's no way to hide the belly's hungers — 
what a curse, what mischief it brews in all our lives! 
Just for hunger we rig and ride our long benched ships 
on the barren salt sea, speeding death to enemies." 

Now, as they talked on, a dog that lay there 
lifted up his muzzle, pricked his ears ... 
It was Argos, long-enduring Odysseus' dog 
he trained as a puppy once, but little joy he got 
since all too soon he shipped to sacred Troy. 
In the old days young hunters loved to set him 
coursing after the wild goats and deer and hares. 
But now with his master gone he lay there, castaway, 
on piles of dung from mules and cattle, heaps collecting 
out before the gates till Odysseus' serving-men 



could cart it off to manure the king's estates. 

Infested with ticks, half -dead from neglect, 

here lay the hound, old Argos. 

But the moment he sensed Odysseus standing by 

he thumped his tail, nuzzling low, and his ears dropped, 

though he had no strength to drag himself an inch 

toward his master. Odysseus glanced to the side 

and flicked away a tear, hiding it from Eumaeus, 

diverting his friend in a hasty, offhand way: 

"Strange, Eumaeus, look, a dog like this, 

lying here on a dung-hill ... 

what handsome lines! But 1 can't say for sure 

if he had the running speed to match his looks 

or he was only the sort that gentry spoil at table, 

show-dogs masters pamper for their points." 

You told the stranger, Eumaeus, loyal swineherd, 
"Here — it's all too true — here's the dog of a man 
who died in foreign parts. But if he had now 
the form and flair he had in his glory days — 
as Odysseus left him, sailing off to Troy — 
you'd be amazed to see such speed, such strength. 
No quarry he chased in the deepest, darkest woods 
could ever slip this hound. A champion tracker too! 
Ah, but he's run out of luck now, poor fellow ... 
his master's dead and gone, so far from home, 
and the heartless women tend him not at all. Slaves, 
with their lords no longer there to crack the whip, 
lose all zest to perform their duties well. Zeus, 
the Old Thunderer, robs a man of half his virtue 
the day the yoke clamps down around his neck." 

With that he entered the well-constructed palace, 
strode through the halls and joined the proud suitors. 
But the dark shadow of death closed down on Argos' eyes 
the instant he saw Odysseus, twenty years away. 



Now Prince Telemachus, first by far to note 
the swineherd coming down the hall, nodded briskly, 
called and waved him on. Eumaeus, glancing about, 
picked up a handy stool where the carver always sat, 
slicing meat for the suitors feasting through the house. 
He took and put it beside the prince's table, facing him, 
straddled it himself as a steward set a plate of meat 
before the man and served him bread from trays. 

Right behind him came Odysseus, into his own house, 
looking for all the world like an old and broken beggar 
hunched on a stick, his body wrapped in shameful rags. 
Just in the doorway , just at the ashwood threshold, 
there he settled down ... 

leaning against the cypress post a master joiner 
planed smooth and hung with a plumb line gears ago. 
Telemachus motioned the swineherd over now, 
and choosing a whole loaf from a fine wicker tray 
and as much meat as his outstretched hands could hold, 
he said, "Now take these to the stranger, tell him too 
to make the rounds of the suitors, beg from one and all. 
Bashfulness, for a man in need, is no great friend." 

And Eumaeus did his bidding, went straight up 
to the guest and winged a greeting: "Here, stranger. 
Prince Telemachus sends you these, and tells you too 
to make the rounds of the suitors, beg from one and all. 
Bashfulness for a beggar, he says, is no great friend." 

"Powerful Zeus!" the crafty king responded, 
"grant that your prince be blest among mankind — 
and all his heart's desires come to pass!" 

Taking the food in both hands, setting it down, 
spread out on his filthy sack before his feet, 
the beggar fell to his meal 
as the singer raised a song throughout the house. 
Once he'd supped and the stirring bard had closed, 
the suitors broke into uproar down along the hall. 



And now Athena came to the side of Laertes' royal son 

and urged him, "Go now, gather crusts from all the suitors, 

test them, so we can tell the innocent from the guilty." 

But not even so would Athena save one man from death. 

Still, off he went, begging from each in turn, 

circUng left to right, reaching out his hand 

like a beggar from the day that he was born. 

They pitied him, gave him scraps, were puzzled too, 

asking each other, "Who is this? " "Where's he from?" 

Till the goatherd Melanthius shouted out in their midst, 

"Listen to me, you lords who court our noble queen — 

I'll tell you about the stranger. I've seen him before. 

1 know for a fact the swineherd led him in, 

though 1 have no idea who the fellow is 

or where he thinks he comes from." 

At that 

Antinous wheeled on Eumaeus, lashing out at him: 
"Your highness, swineherd — why drag this\.o town? 
Haven't we got our share of vagabonds to deal with, 
disgusting beggars who lick the feasters' plates? 
Isn't it quite enough, these swarming crowds 
consuming your master's bounty — 
must you invite this rascal in the bargain?" 

"Antinous, 

highborn as you are," you told the man, Eumaeus, 

"that was a mean low speech! 

Now who'd go out, who on his own hook — 

not 1 — and ask a stranger in from nowhere 

unless he had some skills to serve the house? 

A prophet, a healer who cures disease, a worker in wood 

or even a god-inspired bard whose singing warms the heart — 

they'reXhe ones asked in around the world. A beggar? 

Who'd invite a beggar to bleed his household white? 

You, you of all the suitors are always roughest 

on the servants of our king, on memosl of all. 

Not that 1 care, no, so long as his queen, 

his wise queen, is still alive in the palace, 



Prince Telemachus too." 

"Stop, Eumaeus," 
poised Telemachus broke in quickly now, 
"don't waste so much breath on Antinous here. 
It's just his habit to bait a man with abuse 
and spur the rest as well. " 

He wheeled on the suitor, 
letting loose: "How kind you are to me, Antinous, 
kind as a father to his son! Encouraging me 
to send this stranger packing from my house 
with a harsh command! I'd never do it. God forbid. 
Take and give to the beggar. 1 don't grudge it — 
I'd even urge you on. No scruples now, 
never fear your gifts will upset my mother 
or any servant in King Odysseus' royal house. 
But no such qualm could enter that head of yours, 
bent on feeding your own face, not feeding strangers!" 

Antinous countered the young prince in kind: 
"So high and mighty, Telemachus — such unbridled rage! 
If all the suitors gave him the sort of gift I'll give, 
the house would be rid of him for three whole months!" 
With that from under his table be seized the stool 
that propped his smooth feet as he reveled on — 
just lifting it into view ... 

But as for the rest, 
all gave to the beggar, filled his sack with handouts, 
bread and meat. And Odysseus seemed at the point 
of getting back to his doorsill, 
done with testing suitors, home free himself 
when he stopped beside Antinous, begging face-to-face: 
"Give me a morsel, friend. You're hardly the worst 
Achaean here, it seems. The noblest one, in fact. 
You look like a king to me! 
So you should give a bigger crust than the rest 
and 1 will sing your praises all across the earth. 
1 too once lived in a lofty house that men admired; 



rolling in wealth, I'd often give to a vagabond like myself, 

whoever he was, whatever need had brought him to my door. 

And crowds of servants 1 had, and lots of all it takes 

to live the life of ease, to make men call you rich. 

But Zeus ruined it all — god's will, no doubt — 

when he shipped me off with a roving band of pirates 

bound for Egypt, a long hard sail, to wreck my life. 

There in the Nile delta 1 moored our ships of war. 

God knows 1 ordered my trusty crews to stand by, 

just where they were, and guard the anchored fleet 

and 1 sent a patrol to scout things out from higher ground. 

But swept away by their own reckless fury, the crew went berserk — 

they promptly began to plunder the lush Egyptian farms, 

dragged off the women and children, killed the men. 

Outcries reached the city in no time — stirred by shouts 

the entire town came streaming down at the break of day, 

filling the river plain with chariots, ranks of infantry 

and the gleam of bronze. Zeus who loves the lightning 

flung down murderous panic on all my men-at-arms — 

no one dared to stand his ground and fight, 

disaster ringed us round from every quarter. 

Droves of my men they hacked down with swords, 

led off the rest alive, to labor for them as slaves. 

Myself? They passed me on to a stranger come their way, 

to ship me to Cyprus — lasus' son Dmetor it was, 

who ruled Cyprus then with an iron fist. 

And from there 1 sailed to Ithaca, 

just as you see me now, ground down by pain and sorrow — " 

"Good god almighty!" Antinous cut the beggar short. 
"What spirit brought this pest to plague our feast? 
Back off! Into the open, clear of my table, or you, 
you'll soon land in an Egypt, Cyprus, to break your heart! 
What a brazen, shameless beggar! Scrounging food 
from each man in turn, and look at their handouts, 
reckless, never a qualm, no holding back, not 
when making free with the next man's goods — 
each one's got plenty here." 



"Pity, pity," 
the wry Odysseus countered, drawing away. 
"No sense in your head to match your handsome looks. 
You'd grudge your servant a pinch of salt from your own larder, 
you who lounge at the next man's board but lack the heart 
to tear a crust of bread and hand it on to me, 
though there's god's plenty here." 

Boiling over 

Antinous gave him a scathing look and let fly, 
"Now^ou won't get out of the hall unscarred, 1 swear, 
not after such a filthy string of insults!" 

With that 

he seized the stool and hurled it — 

Square in the back 
it struck Odysseus, just under the right shoulder 
but he stood up against it — steady as a rock, 
unstaggered by Antinous' blow— just shook his head, 
silent, his mind churning with thoughts of bloody work. 
Back he went to the doorsill, crouched, and setting down 
his sack about to burst, he faced the suitors, saying, 
"Hear me out, you lords who court the noble queen, 
1 must say what the heart inside me urges. 
There's nothing to groan about, no hurt, when a man 
takes a blow as he fights to save his own possessions, 
cattle or shining flocks. But Antinous struck me 
all because of my good-for-nothing belly — that, 
that curse that makes such pain for us poor men. 
But if beggars have their gods and Furies too, 
let Antinous meet his death before he meets his bride!" 

"Enough, stranger!" Antinous volleyed back. 
"Sit there and eat in peace — or go get lost! Or else, 
for the way you talk, these young men will hale you 
up and down the halls by your hands or feet 
until you're skinned alive!" 

Naked threats — 
but the rest were outraged, even those brash suitors. 
One would say to another, "Look, Antinous, 
that was a crime, to strike the luckless beggar!" 



"Your fate is sealed if he's some god from the blue. " 



"And the gods do take on the look of strangers 
dropping in from abroad — " 

"Disguised in every way 
as they roam and haunt our cities, watching over us — " 

"All our foul play, all our fair play too!" 

So they warned, but Antinous paid no heed. 
And the anguish welled up in Telemachus' breast 
for the blow his father took, yet he let no tears 
go rolling down his face — just shook his head, 
silent, his mind churning with thoughts of bloody work. 

But then, when cautious Queen Penelope heard 
how Antinous struck the stranger, there in the halls, 
she cried out, with her serving-women round her, 
"May Apollo the Archer strike you just as hard!" 
And her housekeeper Eurynome added quickly, 
"If only our prayers were granted — 
then not one of the lot would live to see 
Dawn climb her throne tomorrow!" 

"Dear old woman," 
alert Penelope replied, "they're all hateful, 
plotting their vicious plots. But Antinous 
is the worst of all — he's black death itself. 
Here's this luckless stranger, wandering down 
the halls and begging scraps — hard-pressed by need — 
and the rest all give the man his fill of food, 
but that one gives him a footstool 
hurled at his right shoulder, hits his back!" 

While she exclaimed among her household women, 
sitting there in her room, Odysseus bent to supper. 
Penelope called the swineherd in and gave instructions: 
"Go, good Eumaeus, tell the stranger to come at once. 
I'd like to give him a warm welcome, ask the man 



if he's heard some news about my gallant husband 
or seen him in the flesh ... 

He seems like one who's roved around the world." 

"My queen, " you answered, Eumaeus, loyal swineherd, 
"if only the lords would hold their peace a moment! 
Such stories he tells — he'd charm you to your depths. 
Three nights, three days 1 kept him in my shelter; 
/was the first the fellow stumbled onto, 
fleeing from some ship. But not even so 
could he bring his tale of troubles to an end. 
You know how you can stare at a bard in wonder — 
trained by the gods to sing and hold men spellbound — 
how you can long to sit there, listening, all your life 
when the man begins to sing. So he charmed my heart, 
1 tell you, huddling there beside me at my fire. 
He and Odysseus' father go way back, he says, 
sworn friends, and the stranger hails from Crete 
where the stock of old King Minos still lives on, 
and from Crete he made his way, racked by hardship, 
tumbling on like a rolling stone until he turned up here. 
He swears he's heard of Odysseus— just in reach, 
in rich Thesprotian country — still alive, 
laden with treasure, heading home at last!" 

"Go," 

the cautious queen responded, "call him here 

so he can tell me his own tale face-to-face. 

Our friends can sit at the gates or down the halls 

and play their games, debauched to their hearts' content. 

Why not? Their own stores, their bread and seasoned wine, 

lie intact at home; food for their serving-men alone. 

But they, they infest our palace day and night, 

they butcher our cattle, our sheep, our fat goats, 

feasting themselves sick, swilling our glowing wine 

as if there's no tomorrow — all of it, squandered. 

No, there is no man like Odysseus in command 

to drive this curse from the house. Dear god, 

if only Odysseus came back home to native soil now, 

he and his son would avenge the outrage of these men — like that!' 



At her last words Telemachus shook with a lusty sneeze 
and the sudden outburst echoed up and down the halls. 
The queen was seized with laughter, calling out 
to Eumaeus winged words: "Quickly, go! 
Bring me this stranger now, face-to-face! 
You hear how my son sealed all 1 said with a sneeze? 
Solet death come down with grim finality on these suitors — 
one and all — not a single man escape his sudden doom! 
And another thing. Mark my words, 1 tell you. 
If I'm convinced that all he says is true, 
I'll dress him in shirt and cloak, in handsome clothes. " 

Off the swineherd went, following her instructions, 
made his way to the stranger's side and winged a word: 
"Old friend — our queen, wise Penelope, summons you, 
the prince's mother! The spirit moves her now, 
heartsick as she is, 

to ask a question or two about her husband- 

And if she's convinced that all you say is true, 

she'll dress you in shirt and cloak. That's what you need, 

that most of all now. Bread you can always beg 

around the country, fill your belly well — 

they'll give you food, whoever has a mind to." 

"Gladly, Eumaeus," the patient man replied, 
"I'll tell her the whole truth, and nothing but, 
Icarius' daughter, your wise queen Penelope. 
1 know all about that man ... 
it's been my lot to suffer what he's suffered- 
But 1 fear the mob's abuse, those rough young bucks, 
their pride and violence hit the iron skies! 
Just now that scoundrel — as 1 went down the halls, 
harming no one — up and dealt me a jolting blow, 
and who would raise a hand to save me? Telemachus? 
Anyone else? No one. So tell Penelope now, 
anxious as she may be, to wait in the halls 
until the sun goes down. Then she can ask me 



all she likes about her husband's journey home. 
But let her give me a seat close by the fire. 
The clothes on my back are tatters. Well you know — 
you are the first 1 begged for care and shelter." 

Back the swineherd went, following his instructions. 
Penelope, just as he crossed her threshold, broke out, 
"Didn't you bring him? What's in the vagrant's mind? 
Fear of someone? Embarrassed by something else, 
here in the house? Is the fellow bashful? 
A bashful man will make a sorry beggar. " 

You answered your queen, Eumaeus, loyal swineherd, 
"He talks to the point — he thinks as the next man would 
who wants to dodge their blows, that brutal crew. 
He tells you to wait here till the sun goes down. 
It's better for you, my queen. Then you can talk 
with the man in private, hear the stranger's news." 

"Nobody's fool, that stranger," wise Penelope said, 
"he sees how things could go. Surely no men on earth 
can match that gang for reckless, deadly schemes." 

So she agreed, and now, mission accomplished, 
back the loyal swineherd went to mix with the suitors. 
Moving next to the prince, he whispered a parting word, 
their heads close together so no one else could hear. 
"Dear boy, 1 must be off, to see to the pigs 
and the whole farm — your living, mine as well. 
You're the one to tend to all things here. 
Look out for your own skin first, 
do take care, you mustn't come to grief. 
Crowds of your own countrymen plot your death — 
let Zeus wipe out the lot before they kill us all!" 



"Right you are, old friend, " the canny prince replied. 
"Now off you go, once you've had your supper. 
But come back bright and early, 
bring some good sound boars for slaughter. Yes, 
I'll tend to all things here, 1 and the deathless gods. " 

And the swineherd sat down again on his polished stool 
and once he'd supped and drunk to his heart's content, 
back he went to his pigs, leaving the royal precincts 
still filled with f casters, all indulging now 
in the joys of dance and song. 
The day was over. Dusk was falling fast. 



 



The Beggar-King 
of Ithaca 



Now along came this tramp, this public nuisance 

who used to scrounge a living round the streets of Ithaca — 

notorious for his belly, a ravenous, bottomless pit 

for food and drink, but he had no pith, no brawn, 

despite the looming hulk that met your eyes. 

Arnaeus was his name, 

so his worthy mother called him at birth, 

but all the young men called him Irus for short 

because he'd hustle messages at any beck and call. 

Well he came by to rout the king from his own house 

and met Odysseus now with a rough, abusive burst: 

"Get off the porch, you old goat, before 1 haul you 

off by the leg! Can't you see them give me the wink, 

all of them here, to drag you out — and so 1 would. 



but I've got some pangs of conscience. Up with you, man, 
or before you know it, we'll be trading blows!" 

A killing look, 
and the wily old soldier countered, "Out of your mind? 
What damage have 1 done you?Whai have 1 said? 
1 don't grudge you anything, 
not if the next man up and gives you plenty. 
This doorsill is big enough for the both of us — 
you've got no call to grudge me what's not yours. 
You're another vagrant, just like me, I'd say, 
and it lies with the gods to make us rich or poor. So, 
keep your fists to yourself, don't press your luck, don't rile me, 
or old as 1 am, I'll bloody your lip, splatter your chest 
and buy myself some peace and quiet for tomorrow. 
1 doubt you'll ever come lumbering back again 
to the halls of Laertes' royal son Odysseus." 

"Look who's talking!" the beggar rumbled in anger. 
"How this pot-bellied pig runs off at the mouth — 
like an old crone at her oven! 
Well y've got a knock-out blow in store for hjw — 
I'll batter the tramp with both fists, bash every tooth 
from his jaws, I'll litter the ground with teeth 
like a rogue sow's, punished for rooting corn! 
Belt up — so the lords can see us fight it out. 
How can you beat a champion half your age?" 

Tongue-lashing each other, tempers flaring, 
there on the polished sill before the lofty doors. 
And Antinous, that grand prince, hearing them wrangle, 
broke into gloating laughter, calling to the suitors, 
"Friends, nothing like this has come our way before — 
what sport some god has brought the palace now! 
The stranger and Irus, look, 
they'd battle it out together, fists flying. 
Come, let's pit them against each other — fast!" 



All leapt from their seats with whoops of laughter, 
clustering round the pair of ragged beggars there 
as Eupithes' son Antinous planned the contest. 
"Quiet, my fine friends. Here's what 1 propose. 
These goat sausages sizzling here in the fire — 
we packed them with fat and blood to have for supper. 
Now, whoever wins this bout and proves the stronger, 
let that man step up and take his pick of the lot! 
What's more, from this day on he feasts among us — 
no other beggar will we allow inside 
to cadge his meals from us!' 

They all cheered 
but Odysseus, foxy veteran, plotted on ... 
"Friends, how can an old man, worn down with pain, 
stand up to a young buck? It's just this belly of mine, 
this trouble-maker, tempts me to take a licking. 
So first, all of you swear me a binding oath: 
come, not one of you steps in for Irus here, 
strikes me a foul blow to pull him through 
and lays me in the dust." 

And at that 
they all mouthed the oath that he required, 
and once they vowed they'd never interfere. 
Prince Telemachus drove the matter home: 
"Stranger, if your spine and fighting pride 
prompt you to go against this fellow now, 
have no fear of any suitor in the pack — 
whoever fouls you will have to face a crowd. 
Count on me, your host. And two lords back me up, 
Antinous and Eurymachus — both are men of sense." 

They all shouted approval of the prince 
as Odysseus belted up, roping his rags around his loins, 
baring his big rippling thighs — his boxer's broad shoulders, 
his massive chest and burly arms on full display 
as Athena stood beside him, 
fleshing out the limbs of the great commander ... 
Despite their swagger, the suitors were amazed. 



gaping at one another, trading forecasts: 
"Irus will soon be ironed out for good!" 

"He's in for the beating he begged for all along." 

"Look at the ham on that old gaffer — " 

"Just under his rags!" 

Each outcry jolted Irus to the core — too late. 
The servants trussed his clothes up, dragged him on, 
the flesh on his body quaking now with terror. 
Antinous rounded on him, flinging insults: 
"You, you clumsy ox, you're better off dead 
or never born at all, if you cringe at him, 
paralyzed with fear of an old, broken hulk, 
ground down by the pains that hound his steps. 
Mark my word — so help me I'll make it good — 
if that old relic whips you and wins the day, 
I'll toss you into a black ship and sail you off 
to Echetus, the mainland king who wrecks all men alive! 
He'll lop your nose and ears with his ruthless blade, 
he'll rip your privates out by the roots, he will, 
and serve them up to his dogs to bolt down raw!" 

That threat shook his knees with a stronger fit 
but they hauled him into the ring. Both men put up their fists — 
with the seasoned fighter Odysseus deeply torn now ... 
should he knock him senseless, leave him dead where he dropped 
or just stretch him out on the ground with a light jab? 
As he mulled things over, that way seemed the best: 
a glancing blow, the suitors would not detect him. 
The two men squared off — 

and Irus hurled a fist 
at Odysseus' right shoulder as Aecame through 
with a hook below the ear, pounding Irus' neck, 
smashing the bones inside — 

Suddenly red blood 



came spurting out of his mouth, and headlong down 
he pitched in the dust, howUng, teeth locked in a grin, 
feet beating the ground — 

And the princely suitors, 
flinging their hands in the air, died laughing. 
Grabbing him by the leg, Odysseus hauled him 
through the porch, across the yard to the outer gate, 
heaped him against the courtyard wall, sitting slumped, 
stuck his stick in his hand and gave him a parting shot: 
"Now hold your post — play the scarecrow to all the pigs and dogs! 
But no more lording it over strangers, no more playing 
the beggar-king for you, you loathsome fool, 
or you'll bring down something worse around your neck!" 

He threw his beggar's sack across his shoulders — 
torn and tattered, slung from a fraying rope — 
then back he went to the sill and took his seat. 
The suitors ambled back as well, laughing] auntily, 
toasting the beggar warmly now, those proud young blades, 
one man egging the other on: "Stranger, friend, may Zeus 
and the other deathless gods fill up your sack with blessings!" 

"All your heart desires!" 

"You've knocked him out of action, 

that insatiable tramp — " 

"That parasite on the land!" 

"Ship him off to Echetus, fast — the mainland king 
who wrecks all men alive!" 

Welcome words 
and a lucky omen too — Odysseus' heart leapt up. 
Antinous laid before him a generous goat sausage, 
bubbling fat and blood. Amphinomus took two loaves 
from the wicker tray and set them down beside him, 
drank his health in a golden cup and said, 
"Cheers, old friend, old father, 
saddled now as you are with so much trouble — 



here's to your luck, great days from this day on!" 

And the one who knew the world replied at length, 
"Amphinomus, you seem like a man of good sense to me. 
Just like your father — at least I've heard his praises, 
Nisus of Dulichion, a righteous man, and rich. 
You're his son, they say, you seem well-spoken, too. 
So 1 will tell you something. Listen. Listen closely. 
Of all that breathes and crawls across the earth, 
our mother earth breeds nothing feebler than a man. 
So long as the gods grant him power, spring in his knees, 
he thinks he will never suffer affliction down the years. 
But then, when the happy gods bring on the long hard times, 
bear them he must, against his will, and steel his heart. 
Our lives, our mood and mind as we pass across the earth, 
turn as the days turn ... 

as the father of men and gods makes each day dawn. 

1 too seemed destined to be a man of fortune once, 

and a wild wicked swath 1 cut, indulged my lust for violence, 

staking all on my father and my brothers. 

Look at me now. 
And so, 1 say, let no man ever be lawless all his life, 
just take in peace what gifts the gods will send. 

True, 

but here 1 see you suitors plotting your reckless work, 
carving away at the wealth, affronting the loyal wife 
of a man who won't be gone from kin and country long. 
1 say he's right at hand — and may some power save you, 
spirit you home before you meet him face-to-face 
the moment he returns to native ground! 
Once under his own roof, he and your friends, 
believe you me, won't part till blood has flowed." 

With that 

he poured out honeyed wine to the gods and drank deeply, 
then restored the cup to the young prince's hands. 
Amphinomus made his way back through the hall, 
heart sick with anguish, shaking his head, 
fraught with grave forebodings ... 



but not even so could he escape his fate. 
Even then Athena had bound him fast to death 
at the hands of Prince Telemachus and his spear. 
Now back he went to the seat that he'd left empty. 

But now the goddess Athena with her glinting eyes 
inspired Penelope, Icarius' daughter, wary, poised, 
to display herself to her suitors, fan their hearts, 
inflame them more, and make her even more esteemed 
by her husband and her son than she had been before. 
Forcing a laugh, she called her maid: "Eurynome, 
my spirit longs — though it never did till now — 
to appear before my suitors, loathe them as 1 do. 
I'd say a word to my son too, for his own good, 
not to mix so much with that pernicious crowd, 
so glib with their friendly talk 
but plotting wicked plots they'll hatch tomorrow. " 

"Well said, my child, " the old woman answered, 
"all to the point. Go to the boy and warn him now, 
hold nothing back. But first you should bathe yourself, 
give a gloss to your face. Don't go down like that — 
your eyes dimmed, your cheeks streaked with tears. 
It makes things worse, this grieving on and on. 
Your son's now come of age — your fondest prayer 
to the deathless gods, to see him wear a beard." 

"Eurynome," discreet Penelope objected, 
"don't try to coax me, care for me as you do, 
to bathe myself, refresh my face with oils. 
Whatever glow 1 had died long ago ... 
the gods of Olympus snuffed it out that day 
my husband sailed away in the hollow ships. 
But please, have Autonoe and Hippodamia come 
and support me in the hall. I'll never brave 
those men alone. I'd be too embarrassed." 



Now as the old nurse bustled through the house 
to give the women orders, call them to the queen, 
the bright-eyed goddess thought of one more thing. 
She drifted a sound slumber over Icarius' daughter, 
back she sank and slept, her limbs fell limp and still, 
reclining there on her couch, all the while Athena, 
luminous goddess, lavished immortal gifts on her 
to make her suitors lose themselves in wonder ... 
The divine unguent first. She cleansed her cheeks, 
her brow and fine eyes with ambrosia smooth as the oils 
the goddess Love applies, donning her crown of flowers 
whenever she joins the Graces' captivating dances. 
She made her taller, fuller in form to all men's eyes, 
her skin whiter than ivory freshly carved, and now, 
Athena's mission accomplished, off the bright one went 
as bare-armed maids came in from their own quarters, 
chattering all the way, and sleep released the queen. 
She woke, touched her cheek with a hand, and mused, 
"Ah, what a marvelous gentle sleep, enfolding me 
in the midst of all my anguish! Now if only 
blessed Artemis sent me a death as gentle, now, 
this instant — no more wasting away my life, 
my heart broken in longing for my husband ... 
He had every strength, 

rising over his countrymen, head and shoulders." 

Then, leaving her well-lit chamber, she descended, 
not alone: two of her women followed close behind. 
That radiant woman, once she reached her suitors, 
drawing her glistening veil across her cheeks, 
paused now where a column propped the sturdy roof, 
with one of her loyal handmaids stationed either side. 
The suitors' knees went slack, their hearts dissolved in lust — 
all of them lifted prayers to lie beside her, share her bed. 
But turning toward her son, she warned, "Telemachus, 
your sense of balance is not what it used to be. 
When you were a boy you had much better judgment. 
Now that you've grown and reached your young prime, 
and any stranger, seeing how tall and handsome you are. 



would think you the son of some great man of wealth — 
now your sense of fairness seems to fail you. 
Consider the dreadful thing just done in our halls — 
how you let the stranger be 50 abused! Why, 
suppose our guest, sitting here at peace, 
here in our own house, 

were hauled and badly hurt by such cruel treatment? 
K7£/'d be shamed, disgraced in all men's eyes!" 

"Mother ... " Telemachus paused, then answered. 
"1 cannot fault your anger at all this. 
My heart takes note of everything, feels it, too, 
both the good and the bad — the boy you knew is gone. 
But how can 1 plan my world in a sane, thoughtful way? 
These men drive me mad, hedging me round, right and left, 
plotting their lethal plots, and no one takes my side. 
Still, this battle between the stranger and Irus 
hardly went as the suitors might have hoped: 
the stranger beat him down! 
If only — Father Zeus, Athena and lord Apollo — 
these gallants, now, this moment, here in our house, 
were battered senseless, heads lolling, knees unstrung, 
some sprawled in the courtyard, some sprawled outside! 
Slumped like Irus down at the front gates now, 
whipped, and his head rolling like some drunk. 
He can't stand up on his feet and stagger home, 
whatever home he's got — the man's demolished." 

So Penelope and her son exchanged their hopes 
as Eury machus stepped in to praise the queen. 
"Ah, daughter of Icarius, wise Penelope, 
if all the princes in Ionian Argos saw you now! 
What a troop of suitors would banquet in your halls, 
tomorrow at sunrise! You surpass all women 
in build and beauty, refined and steady mind." 



"Oh no, Eurymachus," wise Penelope demurred, 
"whatever form and feature I had, what praise I'd won, 
the deathless gods destroyed that day the Achaeans 
sailed away to Troy, my husband in their ships, 
Odysseus — if could return to tend my life 
the renown 1 had would only grow in glory. 
Now my life is torment ... 

look at the griefs some god has loosed against me! 

I'll never forget the day he left this land of ours; 

he caught my right hand by the wrist and said, gently, 

'Dear woman, 1 doubt that every Achaean under arms 

will make it home from Troy, all safe and sound. 

The Trojans, they say, are fine soldiers too, 

hurling javelins, shooting flights of arrows, 

charioteers who can turn the tide — like that! — 

when the great leveler. War, brings on some deadlock. 

So 1 cannot tell if the gods will sail me home again 

or I'll go down out there, on the fields of Troy, 

but all things here must rest in your control. 

Watch over my father and mother in the palace, 

just as now, or perhaps a little more, 

when 1 am far from home. 

But once you see the beard on the boy's cheek, 

you wed the man you like, and leave your house behind.' 

So my husband advised me then. Now it all comes true ... 

a night will come when a hateful marriage falls my lot — 

this cursed life of mine! Zeus has torn away my joy. 

But there's something else that mortifies me now. 

Your way is a far cry from the time-honored way 

of suitors locked in rivalry, striving to win 

some noble woman, a wealthy man's daughter. 

They bring in their own calves and lambs 

to feast the friends of the bride-to-be, yes, 

and shower her with gleaming gifts as well. 

They don't devour the woman's goods scot-free." 



staunch Odysseus glowed with joy to hear all this — 
his wife's trickery luring gifts from her suitors now, 
enchanting their hearts with suave seductive words 
but all the while with something else in mind. 

"Gifts?" 

Eupithes' son Antinous took her point at once. 
"Daughter of Icarius, sensible Penelope, 
whatever gifts your suitors would like to bring, 
accept them. How ungracious to turn those gifts away! 
We won't go back to our own estates, or anywhere else, 
till you have wed the man you find the best. " 

So he proposed, and all the rest agreed. 
Each suitor sent a page to go and get a gift. 
Antinous' man brought in a grand, resplendent robe, 
stiff with embroidery, clasped with twelve gold brooches, 
long pins that clipped into sheathing loops with ease. 
Eurymachus' man brought in a necklace richly wrought, 
gilded, strung with amber and glowing like the sun. 
Eurydamas' two men came with a pair of earrings, 
mulberry clusters dangling in triple drops 
with a glint to catch the heart. 
From the halls of lord Pisander, Polyctor's son, 
a servant brought a choker, a fine, gleaming treasure. 
And so each suitor in turn laid on a handsome gift. 
Then the noble queen withdrew to her upper room, 
her file of waiting ladies close behind her, 
bearing the gorgeous presents in their arms. 

Now the suitors turned to dance and song, 
to the lovely beat and sway, 
waiting for dusk to come upon them there ... 
and the dark night came upon them, lost in pleasure. 
They rushed to set up three braziers along the walls 
to give them light, piled them high with kindling, 
sere, well-seasoned, just split with an ax, 
and mixed in chips to keep the torches flaring. 



The maids of Odysseus, steady man, took turns 
to keep the fires up, but the king himself, 
dear to the gods and cunning to the core, 
gave them orders brusquely: "Maids of Odysseus, 
your master gone so long — quick now, off you go 
to the room where your queen and mistress waits. 
Sit with her there and try to lift her spirits, 
combing wool in your hands or spinning yarn. 
But 1 will trim the torches for all her suitors, 
even if they would like to revel on till Morning 
mounts her throne. They'll never wear me down. 
1 have a name for lasting out the worst." 

At that 

the women burst into laughter, glancing back and forth. 

Flushed with beauty, Melantho mocked him shamelessly — 

Dolius was her father but Penelope brought her up; 

she treated her like her own child and gave her toys 

to cheer her heart. But despite that, her heart 

felt nothing for all her mistress' anguish now. 

She was Eury machus' lover, always slept with him. 

She was the one who mocked her king and taunted, 

"Cock of the walk, did someone beat your brains out? 

Why not go bed down at the blacksmith's cozy forge? 

Or a public place where tramps collect? Why here — 

blithering on, nonstop, 

bold as brass in the face of all these lords? 

No fear in your heart? Wine's got to your wits? — 

or do you always play the fool and babble nonsense? 

Lost your head, have you, because you drubbed that hobo Irus? 

You wait — a better man than Irus will take you on, 

he'll box both sides of your skull with heavy fists 

and cart you out the palace gushing blood!" 

" K7f/wait, 

you bitch" — ^the hardened veteran flashed a killing look. 
"I'll go straight to the prince with your foul talk. 
The prince will chop you to pieces here and now!" 



His fury sent the women fluttering off, scattering 
down the hall with panic shaking every limb — 
they knew he spoke the truth. 
But he took up his post by the flaring braziers, 
tending the fires closely, looking after them all, 
though the heart inside him stirred with other things, 
ranging ahead, now, to all that must be done ... 

But Athena had no mind to let the brazen suitors 
hold back now from their heart-rending insults — 
she meant to make the anguish cut still deeper 
into the core of Laertes' son Odysseus. 
Poly bus' son Eurymachus launched in first, 
baiting the king to give his friends a laugh: 
"Listen to me, you lords who court our noble queen! 
1 simply have to say what's on my mind. Look, 
surely the gods have fetched this beggar here 
to Odysseus' house. At least our torchlight seems 
to come from the sheen of the man's own head — 
there's not a hair on his bald pate, not a wisp!" 

Then he wheeled on Odysseus, raider of cities: 
"Stranger, how would you like to work for me 
if 1 took you on — I'd give you decent wages — 
picking the stones to lay a tight dry wall 
or planting tall trees on the edge of my estate? 
I'd give you rations to last you year-round, 
clothes for your body, sandals for your feet. 
Oh no, you've learned your lazy ways too well, 
you've got no itch to stick to good hard work, 
you'd rather go scrounging round the countryside, 
begging for crusts to stuff your greedy gut!" 

"Ah, Eurymachus," Odysseus, master of many exploits, 
answered firmly, "if only the two of us could qo 
man-to-man in the labors of the field ... 



In the late spring, when the long days come round, 
out in the meadow, 1 swinging a well-curved scythe 
and you swinging yours — we'd test our strength for work, 
fasting right till dusk with lots of hay to mow. 
Or give us a team of oxen to drive, purebreds, 
hulking, ruddy beasts, both lusty with fodder, 
paired for age and puUing-power that never flags — 
with four acres to work, the loam churning under the plow — 
you'd see what a straight unbroken furrow 1 could cut you then. 
Or if Zeus would bring some battle on — out of the blue, 
this very day — and give me a shield and two spears 
and a bronze helmet to fit this soldier's temples, 
then you'd see me fight where front ranks clash — 
no more mocking this belly of mine, not then. 
Enough. You're sick with pride, you brutal fool. 
No doubt you count yourself a great, powerful man 
because you sport with a puny crowd, ill-bred to boot. 
If only Odysseus came back home and stood right here, 
in a flash you'd find those doors — broad as they are — 
too cramped for your race to safety through the porch!" 

That made Eurymachus' fury seethe and burst — 
he gave the beggar a dark look and let fly, "You, 
you odious — I'll make you pay for your ugly rant! 
Bold as brass in the face of all these lords? 
No fear in your heart? Wine's got to your wits? — 
or do you always play the fool and babble nonsense? 
Lost your head, have you, because you drubbed that hobo Irus?" 

As he shouted out he seized a stool, but Odysseus, 
fearing the blow, crouched at Amphinomus' knees 
as Eurymachus hurled and hit the wine-steward, 
clipping his right hand — 
his cup dropped, clattered along the floor 
and flat on his back he went, groaning in the dust. 
The suitors broke into uproar through the shadowed halls, 
glancing at one another, trading angry outcries: 
"Would to god this drifter had dropped dead — " 



"Anywhere else before he landed here!" 



"Then he'd never have loosed such pandemonium." 
"Now we're squabbling over beggars!' 

"No more joy 

in the sumptuous feast ..." 

"Now riot rules the day!" 

But now Prince Telemachus dressed them down: 
"Fools, you're out of your minds! No hiding it, 
food and wine have gone to your heads. Some god 
has got your blood up. Come, now you've eaten well 
go home to bed — when the spirit moves, that is. 
/, for one, I'll drive no guest away." 

So he declared. And they all bit their lips, 
amazed the prince could speak with so much daring. 
At last Amphinomus rose to take the floor, 
the noted son of Nisus, King Aretias' grandson. 
"Fair enough, my friends; when a man speaks well 
we have no grounds for wrangling, no cause for abuse. 
Hands off the stranger! And any other servant 
in King Odysseus' palace. Come, steward, 
pour first drops for the god in every cup; 
let's make libations, then go home to bed. 
The stranger? Leave him here in Odysseus' halls 
and have his host Telemachus, tend him well — 
it's the prince's royal house the man has reached." 

So he said. His proposal pleased them all. 
And gallant Mulius, a herald of Dulichion, 
a friend-in-arms of lord Amphinomus too, 
mixed the men a bowl and, hovering closely, 
poured full rounds for all. They tipped cups 
to the blissful gods and then, libations made, 
they drank the heady wine to their hearts' content 
and went their ways to bed, each suitor to his house. 



 



Penelope and 
Her Guest 



That left the great Odysseus waiting in his hall 
as Athena helped him plot the slaughter of the suitors. 
He turned at once to Telemachus, brisk with orders: 
"Now we must stow the weapons out of reach, my boy, 
all the arms and armor — and when the suitors miss them 
and ask you questions, put them off with a winning story: 
'1 stowed them away, clear of the smoke. A far cry 
from the arms Odysseus left when he went to Troy, 
fire-damaged equipment, black with reeking fumes. 
And a god reminded me of something darker too. 
When you're in your cups a quarrel might break out, 
you'd wound each other, shame your feasting here 
and cast a pall on your courting. 
Iron has powers to draw a man to ruin.' " 



Telemachus did his father's will at once, 
calling out to his old nurse Eurycleia: "Quick, 
dear one, close the women up in their own quarters, 
till 1 can stow my father's weapons in the storeroom. 
Splendid gear, lying about, neglected, black with soot 
since father sailed away. 1 was only a boy then. 
Now 1 must safeguard them from the smoke." 

"High time, child, " the loving nurse replied. 
"If only you'd bother to tend your whole house 
and safeguard a//your treasures. Tell me, 
who's to fetch and carry the torch for you? 
You won't let out the maids who'd light your way." 

"Our friend here will," Telemachus answered coolly. 
"1 won't put up with a man who shirks his work, 
not if he takes his ration from my stores, 
even if he's miles away from home." 

That silenced the old nurse. 
She barred the doors that led from the long hall — 
and up they sprang, Odysseus and his princely son, 
and began to carry off the helmets, studded shields 
and pointed spears, and Pallas Athena strode before them, 
lifting a golden lamp that cast a dazzling radiance round about. 
"Father," Telemachus suddenly burst out to Odysseus, 
"oh what a marvel fills my eyes! Look, look there — 
all the sides of the hall, the handsome crossbeams, 
pinewood rafters, the tall columns towering — 
all glow in my eyes like flaming fire! 
Surely a god is here — 
one of those who rule the vaulting skies!" 

"Quiet," his father, the old soldier, warned him. 
"Get a grip on yourself. No more questions now. 
It's just the way of the gods who rule Olympus. 
Off you go to bed. I'll stay here behind 
to test the women, test your mother too. 



She in her grief will ask me everything 1 know. " 

Under the flaring torchlight, through the hall 
Telemachus made his way to his own bedroom now, 
where he always went when welcome sleep came on him. 
There he lay tonight as well, till Dawn's first light. 
That left the great king still waiting in his hall 
as Athena helped him plot the slaughter of the suitors ... 

Now down from her chamber came reserved Penelope, 
looking for all the world like Artemis or golden Aphrodite. 
Close to the fire her women drew her favorite chair 
with its whorls of silver and ivory, inlaid rings. 
The craftsman who made it years ago, Icmalius, 
added a footrest under the seat itself, 
mortised into the frame, 
and over it all was draped a heavy fleece. 
Here Penelope took her place, discreet, observant. 
The women, arms bared, pressing in from their quarters, 
cleared away the tables, the heaped remains of the feast 
and the cups from which the raucous lords had drunk. 
Raking embers from the braziers onto the ground, 
they piled them high again with seasoned wood, 
providing light and warmth. 

And yet again 
Melantho lashed out at Odysseus: "You still here? — 
you pest, slinking around the house all night, 
leering up at the women? 

Get out, you tramp — be glad of the food you got — 
or we'll sling a torch at you, rout you out at once!" 

A killing glance, and the old trooper countered, 
"What's possessed you, woman? Why lay into me? Such abuse! 
Just because I'm filthy, because 1 wear such rags, 
roving round the country, living hand-to-mouth. 
But it's fate that drives me on: 
that's the lot of beggars, homeless drifters. 
1 too once lived in a lofty house that men admired; 



rolling in wealth, I'd often give to a vagabond like myself, 

whoever he was, whatever need had brought him to my door. 

And crowds of servants 1 had, and lots of all it takes 

to live the life of ease, to make men call you rich. 

But Zeus ruined it all — god's will, no doubt. 

So beware, woman, or one day you may lose it all, 

all your glitter that puts your work-mates in the shade. 

Or your mistress may just fly in a rage and dress you down 

or Odysseus may return — there's still room for hope! 

Or if he's dead as you think and never coming home, 

well there's his son, Telemachus ... 

like father, like son — thanks to god Apollo. 

No women's wildness here in the house escapes 

the prince's eye. He's come of age at last. " 

So he warned, and alert Penelope heard him, 
wheeled on the maid and tongue-lashed her smartly: 
"Make no mistake, you brazen, shameless bitch, 
none of your ugly work escapes me either — 
you will pay for it with your life, you will! 
How well you knew — you heard from my own lips — 
that 1 meant to probe this stranger in our house 
and ask about my husband ... my heart breaks for him." 

She turned to her housekeeper Eurynome and said, 
"Now bring us a chair and spread it soft with fleece, 
so our guest can sit and tell me his whole story 
and hear me out as well. 
I'd like to ask him questions, point by point." 

Eurynome bustled off to fetch a polished chair 
and set it down and spread it soft with fleece. 
Here Odysseus sat, the man of many trials, 
as cautious Penelope began the conversation: 
"Stranger, let me start our questioning myself ... 
Who are you? where are you from? your city? your parents?" 



"My good woman," Odysseus, master of craft, replied, 
"no man on the face of the earth could find fault with you. 
Your fame, believe me, has reached the vaulting skies. 
Fame like a flawless king's who dreads the gods, 
who governs a kingdom vast, proud and strong — 
who upholds justice, true, and the black earth 
bears wheat and barley, trees bow down with fruit 
and the sheep drop lambs and never fail and the sea 
teems with fish — thanks to his decent, upright rule, 
and under his sovereign sway the people flourish. 
So then, here in your house, ask me anything else 
but don't, please, search out my birth, my land, 
or you'll fill my heart to overflowing even more 
as 1 bring back the past ... 
1 am a man who's had his share of sorrows. 
It's wrong for me, in someone else's house, 
to sit here moaning and groaning, sobbing so — 
it makes things worse, this grieving on and on. 
One of your maids, or you yourself, might scold me, 
think it's just the wine that had doused my wits 
and made me drown in tears." 

"No, no, stranger," wise Penelope demurred, 
"whatever form and feature 1 had, what praise I'd won, 
the deathless gods destroyed that day the Achaeans 
sailed away to Troy, my husband in their ships, 
Odysseus — if could return to tend my life 
the renown 1 had would only grow in glory. 
Now my life is torment ... 

look at the griefs some god has loosed against me! 
All the nobles who rule the islands round about, 
Dulichion, Same, and wooded Zacynthus too, 
and all who lord it in sunny Ithaca itself — 
they court me against my will, they lay waste my house. 
So 1 pay no heed to strangers, suppliants at my door, 
not even heralds out on their public errands here — 
1 yearn for Odysseus, always, my heart pines away. 
They rush the marriage on, and 1 spin out my wiles. 
A god from the blue it was inspired me first 



to set up a great loom in our royal halls 

and 1 began to weave, and the weaving finespun, 

the yarns endless, and 1 would lead them on: Young men, 

my suitors, now that King Odysseus is no more, 

go slowly, keen as you are to marry me, until 

1 can finish off this web ... 

so my weaving won't all fray and come to nothing. 

This is a shroud for old lord Laertes, for that day 

when the deadly fate that lays us out at last will take him down. 

1 dread the shame my countrywomen would heap upon me, 

yes, if a man of such wealth should lie in state 

without a shroud for cover.' 

My very words, 
and despite their pride and passion they believed me. 
So by day I'd weave at my great and growing web — 
by night, by the light of torches set beside me, 
1 would unravel all I'd done. Three whole years 
1 deceived them blind, seduced them with this scheme. 
Then, when the wheeling seasons brought the fourth year on 
and the months waned and the long days came round once more, 
then, thanks to my maids — the shameless, reckless creatures — 
the suitors caught me in the act, denounced me harshly. 
So 1 finished it off. Against my will. They forced me. 
And now 1 cannot escape a marriage, nor can 1 contrive 
a deft way out. My parents urge me to tie the knot 
and my son is galled as they squander his estate — 
he sees it all. He's a grown man by now, equipped 
to tend to his own royal house and tend it well: 
Zeus grants my son that honor ... 
But for all that — now tell me who you are. 
Where do you come from? You've hardly sprung 
from a rock or oak like some old man of legend. " 

The master improviser answered, slowly, 
"My lady ... wife of Laertes' son, Odysseus, 
will your questions about my family never end? 
All right then. Here's my story. Even though 
it plunges me into deeper grief than 1 feel now. 



But that's the way of the world, when one has been 
so far from home, so long away as I, roving over 
many cities of men, enduring many hardships. 

Still, 

my story will tell you all you need to know. 

There is a land called Crete ... 
ringed by the wine-dark sea with rolling whitecaps — 
handsome country, fertile, thronged with people 
well past counting — boasting ninety cities, 
language mixing with language side-by -side. 
First come the Achaeans, then the native Cretans, 
hardy, gallant in action, then Cydonian clansmen, 
Dorians living in three tribes, and proud Pelasgians last. 
Central to all their cities is magnificent Cnossos, 
the site where Minos ruled and each ninth year 
conferred with almighty Zeus himself. Minos, 
father of my father, Deucalion, that bold heart. 
Besides myself Deucalion sired Prince Idomeneus, 
who set sail for Troy in his beaked ships of war, 
escorting Atreus' sons. My own name is Aethon. 
1 am the younger-born; 
my older brother's a better man than 1 am. 
Now, it was there in Cnossos that 1 saw him ... 
Odysseus — and we traded gifts of friendship. 
A heavy gale had landed him on our coast, 
driven him way off course, rounding Malea's cape 
when he was bound for Troy. He anchored in Amnisus, 
hard by the goddess' cave of childbirth and labor, 
that rough harbor — barely riding out the storm. 
He came into town at once, asking for Idomeneus, 
claiming to be my brother's close, respected friend. 
Too late. Ten or eleven days had already passed 
since he set sail for Troy in his beaked ships. 
So 1 took Odysseus back to my own house, 
gave him a hero's welcome, treated him in style — 
stores in our palace made for princely entertainment. 
As for his comrades, all who'd shipped with him. 



I dipped into public stock to give them barley, 
ruddy wine and fine cattle for slaughter, 
beef to their hearts' content. A dozen days 
they stayed with me there, those brave Achaeans, 
penned up by a North Wind so stiff that a man, 
even on dry land, could never keep his feet — 
some angry spirit raised that blast, I'd say. 
Then on the thirteenth day the wind died down 
and they set sail for Troy." 

Falsehoods all, 
but he gave his falsehoods all the ring of truth. 
As she listened on, her tears flowed and soaked her cheeks 
as the heavy snow melts down from the high mountain ridges, 
snow the West Wind piles there and the warm East Wind thaws 
and the snow, melting, swells the rivers to overflow their banks — 
so she dissolved in tears, streaming down her lovely cheeks, 
weeping for him, her husband, sitting there beside her. 
Odysseus' heart went out to his grief-stricken wife 
but under his lids his eyes remained stock-still — 
they might have been horn or iron — 
his guile fought back his tears. And she, 
once she'd had her fill of grief and weeping, 
turned again to her guest with this reply: 
"Now, stranger, 1 think I'll test you, just to see 
if there in your house, with all his friends-in-arms, 
you actually entertained my husband as you say. 
Come, tell me what sort of clothing he wore, 
what cut of man was he? 
What of the men who followed in his train?" 

"Ah good woman," 
Odysseus, the great master of subtlety, returned, 
"how hard it is to speak, after so much time 
apart ... why, some twenty years have passed 
since he left my house and put my land behind him. 
Even so, imagine the man as 1 portray him — 
1 can see him now. 

King Odysseus ... 
he was wearing a heavy woolen cape, sea-purple. 



in double folds, with a golden brooch to clasp it, 
twin sheaths for the pins, on the face a work of art: 
a hound clenching a dappled fawn in its front paws, 
slashing it as it writhed. All marveled to see it, 
solid gold as it was, the hound slashing, throttling 
the fawn in its death-throes, hoofs flaiUng to break free. 
1 noticed his glossy tunic too, clinging to his skin 
like the thin glistening skin of a dried onion, 
silky, soft, the glint of the sun itself. 
Women galore would gaze on it with relish. 
And this too. Bear it in mind, won't you? 
I've no idea if Odysseus wore these things at home 
or a comrade gave him them as he boarded ship, 
or a host perhaps — the man was loved by many. 
There were few Achaeans to equal him ... and 1? 
1 gave him a bronze sword myself, a lined cloak, 
elegant, deep red, and a fringed shirt as well, 
and 1 saw him off in his long benched ship of war 
in lordly style. 

Something else. He kept a herald 
beside him, a man a little older than himself. 
I'll try to describe him to you, best 1 can. 
Round-shouldered he was, swarthy, curly-haired. 
His name? Eurybates. And Odysseus prized him 
most of all his men. Their minds worked as one." 

His words renewed her deep desire to weep, 
recognizing the strong clear signs Odysseus offered. 
But as soon as she'd had her fill of tears and grief, 
Penelope turned again to her guest and said, 
"Now, stranger, much as 1 pitied you before, 
now in my house you'll be my special friend, 
my honored guest. 1 am the one, myself, 
who gave him the very clothes that you describe. 
1 brought them up from the storeroom, folded them nea 
fastened the golden brooch to adorn my husband, 
Odysseus — never again will 1 embrace him, 
striding home to his own native land. 



A black day it was 

when he took ship to see that cursed city ... 
Destroy, I call it — 1 hate to say its name!" 

"Ah my queen," the man of craft assured her, 
"noble wife of Laertes' son, Odysseus, 
ravage no more your lovely face with tears 
or consume your heart with grieving for your husband. 
Not that I'd blame you, ever. Any woman will mourn 
the bridegroom she has lost, lain with in love 
and borne his children too. Even though he 
was no Odysseus — a man like a god, they say. 
But dry your tears and take my words to heart. 
1 will tell you the whole truth and hide nothing: 
1 have heard Odysseus now, at last, is on his way, 
he's just in reach, in rich Thesprotian country — 
the man is still alive 

and he's bringing home a royal hoard of treasure, 
gifts he won from the people of those parts. 
His crew? He's lost his crew and hollow ship 
on the wine-dark waters off Thrinacia Island. 
Zeus and Helios raged, dead set against Odysseus 
for his men-at-arms had killed the cattle of the Sun, 
so down to the last hand they drowned in crashing seas. 
But not Odysseus, clinging tight to his ship's keel — 
the breakers flung him out onto dry land, on Scheria, 
the land of Phaeacians, close kin to the gods themselves, 
and with all their hearts they prized him like a god, 
showered the man with gifts, and they'd have gladly 
sailed him home unscathed. In fact Odysseus 
would have been here beside you long ago, 
but he thought it the better, shrewder course 
to recoup his fortunes roving through the world. 
At sly profit-turning there's not a man alive 
to touch Odysseus. He's got no rival there. 
So 1 learned from Phidon, king of Thesprotia, 
who swore to me as he poured libations in his house, 
'The ship's hauled down and the shipmates set to sail. 



to take Odysseus home to native land.' 

Butl... 

he shipped me off before. A Thesprotian cutter 
chanced to be heading for Dulichion rich in wheat. 
But he showed me all the treasure Odysseus had amassed, 
enough to last a man and ten generations of his heirs — 
so great the wealth stored up for him in the king's vaults! 
But Odysseus, he made clear, was off at Dodona then 
to hear the will of Zeus that rustles forth 
from the god's tall leafy oak: how should he return, 
after all the years away, to his own beloved Ithaca, 
openly or in secret? 

And so the man is safe, 
as you can see, and he's coming home, soon, 
he's close, close at hand — 
he won't be severed long from kin and country, 
no, not now. 1 give you my solemn, binding oath. 
1 swear by Zeus, the first, the greatest god — 
by Odysseus' hearth, where 1 have come for help: 
all will come to pass, 1 swear, exactly as 1 say. 
True, this very month— just as the old moon dies 
and the new moon rises into life — Odysseus will return!" 

"If only, my friend," reserved Penelope exclaimed, 
"everything you say would come to pass! 
You'd soon know my affection, know my gifts. 
Any man you meet would call you blest. 
But my heart can sense the way it all will go. 
Odysseus, 1 tell you, is never coming back, 
nor will you ever gain your passage home, 
for we have no masters in our house like him 
at welcoming in or sending off an honored guest. 
Odysseus. There was a man, or was he all a dream? 
But come, women, wash the stranger and make his bed, 
with bedding, blankets and lustrous spreads to keep him warm 
till Dawn comes up and takes her golden throne. 
Then, tomorrow at daybreak, bathe him well 
and rub him down with oil, so he can sit beside 



Telemachus in the hall, enjoy his breakfast there. 

And anyone who offends our guest beyond endurance — 

he defeats himself; he's doomed to failure here, 

no matter how raucously he raves and blusters on. 

For how can you know, my friend, if 1 surpass 

all women in thoughtf ulness and shrewd good sense, 

if I'd allow you to take your meals at hall 

so weatherbeaten, clad in rags and tatters? 

Our lives are much too brief ... 

If a man is cruel by nature, cruel in action, 

the mortal world will call down curses on his head 

while he is alive, and all will mock his memory after death. 

But then if a man is kind by nature, kind in action, 

his guests will carry his fame across the earth 

and people all will praise him from the heart." 

"Wait, my queen," the crafty man objected, 
"noble wife of Laertes' son, Odysseus — 
blankets and glossy spreads? They 're not my style. 
Not from the day 1 launched out in my long-oared ship 
and the snowy peaks of Crete went fading far astern. 
I'll lie as I've done through sleepless nights before. 
Many a night I've spent on rugged beds afield, 
waiting for Dawn to mount her lovely throne. 
Nor do 1 pine for any footbaths either. 
Of all the women who serve your household here, 
not one will touch my feet. Unless, perhaps, 
there is some old retainer, the soul of trust, 
someone who's borne as much as 1 have borne ... 
1 wouldn't mind if 5Ae would touch my feet." 

"Dear friend, 
the discreet Penelope replied, "never has any man 
so thoughtful — of all the guests in my palace 
come from foreign parts — been as welcome as you ... 
so sensible, so apt, is every word you say. 
1 have just such an old woman, seasoned, wise, 
who carefully tended my unlucky husband, reared him, 
took him into her arms the day his mother bore him — 



frail as the woman is, she'll wash your feet. 
Up with you now, my good old Eurycleia, 
come and wash your master's ... equal in years. 
Odysseus must have feet and hands like his by now — 
hardship can age a person overnight." 

At that name 
the old retainer buried her face in both hands, 
burst into warm tears and wailed out in grief, 
"Oh my child, how helpless 1 am to help you now! 
How Zeus despised you, more than all other men, 
god-fearing man that you were ... 
Never did any mortal burn the Old Thunderer 
such rich thighbones — offerings charred and choice — 
never as many as you did, praying always to reach 
a ripe old age and raise a son to glory. Now, 
you alone he's robbed of your home-coming day! 
Just so, the women must have mocked my king, 
far away, when he'd stopped at some fine house — 
just as all these bitches, stranger, mock you here. 
And because you shrink from their taunts, their wicked barbs, 
you will not let them wash you. The work is mine — 
Icarius' daughter, wise Penelope, bids me now 
and 1 am all too glad, /will wash your feet, 
both for my own dear queen and for yourself — 
your sorrows wring my heart ... and why? 
Listen to me closely, mark my words. 
Many a wayworn guest has landed here 
but never, 1 swear, has one so struck my eyes — 
your build, your voice, your feet — you're like Odysseus ... 
to the life!" 

"Old woman," wily Odysseus countered, 
"that's what they all say who've seen us both. 
We bear a striking resemblance to each other, 
as you have had the wit to say yourself. " 

The old woman took up a burnished basin 
she used for washing feet and poured in bowls 
of fresh cold water before she stirred in hot. 



Odysseus, sitting full in the firelight, suddenly 
swerved round to the dark, gripped by a quick misgiving — 
soon as she touched him she might spot the scar! 
The truth would all come out. 

Bending closer 
she started to bathe her master ... then, 
in a flash, she knew the scar — 

that old wound 
made years ago by a boar's white tusk when Odysseus 
went to Parnassus, out to see Autolycus and his sons. 
The man was his mother's noble father, one who excelled 
the world at thievery, that and subtle, shifty oaths. 
Hermes gave him the gift, overjoyed by the thighs 
of lambs and kids he burned in the god's honor — 
Hermes the ready partner in his crimes. Now, 
Autolycus once visited Ithaca's fertile land, 
to find his daughter 's son had just been born. 
Eurycleia set him down on the old man's knees 
as he finished dinner, urging him, "Autolycus, 
you must find a name for your daughter's darling son. 
The baby comes as the answer to her prayers." 

"You, 

my daughter, and you, my son-in-law," Autolycus returned, 

"give the boy the name 1 tell you now. Just as 1 

have come from afar, creating pain for many — 

men and women across the good green earth — 

so let his name be Odysseus... 

the Son of Pain, a name he'll earn in full. 

And when he has come of age and pays his visit 

to Parnassus — ^the great estate of his mother's line 

where all my treasures lie — 1 will give him enough 

to cheer his heart, then speed him home to you." 

And so, 

in time, Odysseus went to collect the splendid gifts. 
Autolycus and the sons of Autolycus warmed him in 
with eager handclasps, hearty words of welcome. 
His mother's mother, Amphithea, hugged the boy 
and kissed his face and kissed his shining eyes. 



Autolycus told his well-bred sons to prepare 
a princely feast. They followed orders gladly, 
herded an ox inside at once, five years old, 
skinned it and split the carcass into quarters, 
deftly cut it in pieces, skewered these on spits, 
roasted all to a turn and served the portions out. 
So all day long till the sun went down they feasted, 
consuming equal shares to their hearts' content. 
Then when the sun had set and night came on 
they turned to bed and took the gift of sleep. 

As soon 

as young Dawn with her rose-red fingers shone once more 

they all moved out for the hunt, hounds in the lead, 

Autolycus' sons and Prince Odysseus in their ranks. 

Climbing Parnassus' ridges, thick with timber", 

they quickly reached the mountain's windy folds 

and just as the sun began to strike the plowlands, 

rising out of the deep calm flow of the Ocean River, 

the beaters came to a wooded glen, the hounds broke, 

hot on a trail, and right behind the pack they came, 

Autolycus' sons — Odysseus out in front now, 

pressing the dogs, brandishing high his spear 

with its long shadow waving. Then and there 

a great boar lay in wait, in a thicket lair so dense 

that the sodden gusty winds could never pierce it, 

nor could the sun's sharp rays invade its depths 

nor a downpour drench it through and through, 

so dense, so dark, and piled with fallen leaves. 

Here, as the hunters closed in for the kill, 

crowding the hounds, the tramp of men and dogs 

came drumming round the boar — he crashed from his lair, 

his razor back bristling, his eyes flashing fire 

and charging up to the hunt he stopped, at bay — 

and Odysseus rushed him first, 

shaking his long spear in a sturdy hand, 

wild to strike but the boar struck faster, 

lunging in on the slant, a tusk thrusting up 

over the boy 's knee, gouging a deep strip of flesh 



but it never hit the bone — 

Odysseus thrust and struck, 
stabbing the beast's right shoulder — 

a glint of bronze — 
the point ripped clean through, and down in the dust he dropped, 
grunting out his breath as his life winged away. 
The sons of Autolycus, working over Odysseus, 
skillfully binding up his open wound — 
the gallant, godlike prince — 
chanted an old spell that stanched the blood 
and quickly bore him home to their father's palace. 
There, in no time, Autolycus and the sons of Autolycus 
healed him well and, showering him with splendid gifts, 
sped Odysseus back to his native land, to Ithaca, 
a young man filled with joy . His happy parents, 
his father and noble mother, welcomed him home 
and asked him of all his exploits, blow-by-blow: 
how did he get that wound? He told his tale with style, 
how the white tusk of a wild boar had gashed his leg, 
hunting on Parnassus with Autolycus and his sons ... 

That scar — 

as the old nurse cradled his leg and her hands passed down 

she felt it, knew it, suddenly let his foot fall — 

down it dropped in the basin — ^the bronze clanged, 

tipping over, spilling water across the floor. 

Joy and torment gripped her heart at once, 

tears rushed to her eyes — ^voice choked in her throat 

she reached for Odysseus' chin and whispered quickly, 

"Yes, yes! you are Odysseus— oh dear boy — 

1 couldn't know you before ... 

not till 1 touched the body of my king!" 

She glanced at Penelope, keen to signal her 
that here was her own dear husband, here and now, 
but she could not catch the glance, she took no heed, 
Athena turned her attention elsewhere. But Odysseus — 
his right hand shot out, clutching the nurse's throat, 
with his left he hugged her to himself and muttered. 



"Nurse, you want to kill me? You suckled me yourself 

at your own breast — and now I'm home, at last, 

after bearing twenty years of brutal hardship, 

home, on native ground. But now you know, 

now that a god has flashed it in your mind, 

quiet! not a word to anyone in the house. 

Or else, 1 warn you — and 1 mean business too — 

if a god beats down these brazen suitors at my hands, 

1 will not spare you — my old nurse that you are — 

when 1 kill the other women in my house." 

"Child, " shrewd old Eurycleia protested, 
"what nonsense you let slip through your teeth! 
You know me — I'm stubborn, never give an inch — 
I'll keep still as solid rock or iron. 
One more thing. Take it to heart, 1 tell you. 
If a god beats down these brazen suitors at your hands, 
I'll report in full on the women in your house: 
who are disloyal to you, who are guiltless." 

"Nurse," the cool tactician Odysseus said, 
"why bother to count them off? A waste of breath. 
I'll observe them, judge each one myself. 
Just be quiet. Keep your tales to yourself. 
Leave the rest to the gods." 

Hushed so, 
the old nurse went padding along the halls 
to fetch more water — her basin had all spilled — 
and once she'd bathed and rubbed him down with oil, 
Odysseus drew his chair up near the fire again, 
trying to keep warm, 

but he hid his scar beneath his beggar's rags 

as cautious Penelope resumed their conversation: 

"My friend, 1 have only one more question for you, 

something slight, now the hour draws on for welcome sleep — 

for those who can yield to sweet repose, that is, 

heartsick as they are. As for myself, though, 

some god has sent me pain that knows no bounds. 



All day long 1 indulge myself in sighs and tears 

as 1 see to my tasks, direct the household women. 

When night foils and the world lies lost in sleep, 

1 take to my bed, my heart throbbing, about to break, 

anxieties swarming, piercing — 1 may go mad with grief. 

Like Pandareus' daughter, the nightingale in the green woods 

lifting her lovely song at the first warm rush of spring, 

perched in the treetops' rustling leaves and pouring forth 

her music shifting, trilling and sinking, rippling high to burst 

in grief for Itylus, her beloved boy. King Zethus' son 

whom she in innocence once cut down with bronze ... 

so my wavering heart goes shuttUng, back and forth: 

Do 1 stay beside my son and keep all things secure — 

my lands, my serving- women, the grand high-roofed house — 

true to my husband's bed, the people's voice as well? 

Or do 1 follow, at last, the best man who courts me 

here in the halls, who gives the greatest gifts? 

My son — ^when he was a boy and lighthearted — 

urged me not to marry and leave my husband's house. 

But now he has grown and reached his young prime, 

he begs me to leave our palace, travel home. 

Telemachus, so obsessed with his own estate, 

the wealth my princely suitors bleed away. 

But please, 

read this dream for me, won't you? Listen closely ... 

1 keep twenty geese in the house, from the water trough 

they come and peck their wheat — 1 love to watch them all. 

But down from a mountain swooped this great hook-beaked eagle, 

yes, and he snapped their necks and killed them one and all 

and they lay in heaps throughout the halls while he, 

back to the clear blue sky he soared at once. 

But /wept and wailed — only a dream, of course — 

and our well-groomed ladies came and clustered round me, 

sobbing, stricken: the eagle killed my geese. But down 

he swooped again and settling onto a jutting rafter 

called out in a human voice that dried my tears, 

'Courage, daughter of famous King Icarius! 

This is no dream but a happy waking vision. 



real as day, that will come true for you. 
The geese were your suitors — 1 was once the eagle 
but now 1 am your husband, back again at last, 
about to launch a terrible fate against them all!' 
So he vowed, and the soothing sleep released me. 
1 peered around and saw my geese in the house, 
pecking at their wheat, at the same trough 
where they always took their meal." 

"Dear woman," 
quick Odysseus answered, "twist it however you like, 
your dream can only mean one thing. Odysseus 
told you himself — he'll make it come to pass. 
Destruction is clear for each and every suitor; 
not a soul escapes his death and doom." 

"Ah my friend," seasoned Penelope dissented, 
"dreams are hard to unravel, wayward, drifting things — 
not all we glimpse in them will come to pass ... 
Two gates there are for our evanescent dreams, 
one is made of ivory, the other made of horn. 
Those that pass through the ivory cleanly carved 
are will-o'-the-wisps, their message bears no fruit. 
The dreams that pass through the gates of polished horn 
are fraught with truth, for the dreamer who can see them. 
But 1 can't believe my strange dream has come that way, 
much as my son and 1 would love to have it so. 
One more thing I'll tell you — ^weigh it well. 
The day that dawns today, this cursed day, 
will cut me off from Odysseus' house. Now, 
1 mean to announce a contest with those axes, 
the ones he would often line up here inside the hall, 
twelve in a straight unbroken row like blocks to shore a keel, 
then stand well back and whip an arrow through the lot. 
Now 1 will bring them on as a trial for my suitors. 
The hand that can string the bow with greatest ease, 
that shoots an arrow clean through all twelve axes — 
he's the man 1 follow, yes, forsaking this house 
where 1 was once a bride, this gracious house 



so filled with the best that life can offer — 
I shall always remember it, that I know ... 
even in my dreams." 

"Oh my queen," 
Odysseus, man of exploits, urged her on, 
"royal wife of Laertes' son, Odysseus, now, 
don't put off this test in the halls a moment. 
Before that crew can handle the polished bow, 
string it taut and shoot through all those axes — 
Odysseus, man of exploits, will be home with you!" 

"If only, my friend," the wise Penelope replied, 
"you were willing to sit beside me in the house, 
indulging me in the comfort of your presence, 
sleep would never drift across my eyes. 
But one can't go without his sleep forever. 
The immortals give each thing its proper place 
in our mortal lives throughout the good green earth. 
So now I'm going back to my room upstairs 
and lie down on my bed, 
that bed of pain my tears have streaked, year in, 
year out, from the day Odysseus sailed away to see ... 
Destroy, 1 call it — 1 hate to say its name! 
There I'll rest, while you lie here in the hall, 
spreading your blankets somewhere on the floor, 
or the women will prepare a decent bed." 

With that 

the queen went up to her lofty well-lit room 

and not alone: her women followed close behind. 

Penelope, once they reached the upper story, 

fell to weeping for Odysseus, her beloved husband, 

till watchful Athena sealed her eyes with welcome sleep. 



 



Portents Gather 



Off in the entrance-hall the great king made his bed, 
spreading out on the ground the raw hide of an ox, 
heaping over it fleece from sheep the suitors 
butchered day and night, then Eurynome threw 
a blanket over him, once he'd nestled down. 
And there Odysseus lay ... 
plotting within himself the suitors' death — 
awake, alert, as the women slipped from the house, 
the maids who whored in the suitors' beds each night, 
tittering, linking arms and frisking as before. 
The master's anger rose inside his chest, 
torn in thought, debating, head and heart — 
should he up and rush them, kill them one and all 
or let them rut with their lovers one last time? 
The heart inside him growled low with rage, 



as a bitch mounting over her weak, defenseless puppies 

growls, facing a stranger, bristling for a showdown — 

so he growled from his depths, hackles rising at their outrage. 

But he struck his chest and curbed his fighting heart: 

"Bear up, old heart! You've borne worse, far worse, 

that day when the Cyclops, man-mountain, bolted 

your hardy comrades down. But you held fast — 

Nobody but your cunning pulled you through 

the monster's cave you thought would be your death. " 

So he forced his spirit into submission, 
the rage in his breast reined back — unswerving, 
all endurance. But he himself kept tossing, turning, 
intent as a cook before some white-hot blazing fire 
who rolls his sizzling sausage back and forth, 
packed with fat and blood — keen to broil it quickly, 
tossing, turning it, this way, that way — so he cast about: 
how could he get these shameless suitors in his clutches, 
one man facing a mob? ... when close to his side she came, 
Athena sweeping down from the sky in a woman's build 
and hovering at his head, the goddess spoke: 
"Why still awake? The unluckiest man alive! 
Here is your house, your wife at home, your son, 
as fine a boy as one could hope to have. " 

"True," 

the wily fighter replied, "how right you are, goddess, 
but still this worry haunts me, heart and soul — 
how can 1 get these shameless suitors in my clutches? 
Single-handed, braving an army always camped inside. 
There's another worry, that haunts me even more. 
What if 1 kill them — ^thanks to you and Zeus — 
how do 1 run from under their avengers? 
Show me the way, 1 ask you." 

"Impossible man!" 
Athena bantered, the goddess' eyes ablaze. 
"Others are quick to trust a weaker comrade, 
some poor mortal, far less cunning than 1. 
But 1 am a goddess, look, the very one who 



guards you in all your trials to the last. 

1 tell you this straight out: 

even if fifty bands of mortal fighters 

closed around us, hot to kill us off in battle, 

still you could drive away their herds and sleek flocks! 

So, surrender to sleep at last. What a misery, 

keeping watch through the night, wide awake — 

you'll soon come up from under all your troubles." 

With that she showered sleep across his eyes 
and back to Olympus went the lustrous goddess. 
As soon as sleep came on him, loosing his limbs, 
slipping the toils of anguish from his mind, 
his devoted wife awoke and, 
sitting up in her soft bed, returned to tears. 
When the queen had wept to her heart's content 
she prayed to the Huntress, Artemis, first of all: 
"Artemis — goddess, noble daughter of Zeus, if only 
you'd whip an arrow through my breast and tear my life out, 
now, at once! Or let some whirlwind pluck me up 
and sweep me away along those murky paths and 
fling me down where the Ocean River running 
round the world rolls back upon itself! 

Quick 

as the whirlwinds swept away Pandareus' daughters — 

years ago, when the gods destroyed their parents, 

leaving the young girls orphans in their house. 

But radiant Aphrodite nursed them well 

on cheese and luscious honey and heady wine, 

and Hera gave them beauty and sound good sense, 

more than all other women — ^virgin Artemis made them tall 

and Athena honed their skills to fashion lovely work. 

But then, when Aphrodite approached Olympus' peaks 

to ask for the girls their crowning day as brides 

from Zeus who loves the lightning — Zeus who knows all, 

all that's fated, all not fated, for mortal man — 

then the storm spirits snatched them away 



and passed them on to the hateful Furies, 
yes, for all theirloving care. 

Just so 

may the gods who rule Olympus blot me out! 

Artemis with your glossy braids, come shoot me dead — 

so 1 can plunge beneath this loathsome earth 

with the image of Odysseus vivid in my mind. 

Never let me warm the heart of a weaker man! 

Even grief is bearable, true, when someone weeps 

through the days, sobbing, heart convulsed with pain, 

yet embraced by sleep all night — sweet oblivion, sleep 

dissolving all, the good and the bad, once it seals our eyes — 

but even my dreams torment me, sent by wicked spirits. 

Again — just this night — someone lay beside me ... 

like Odysseus to the life, when he embarked 

with his men-at-arms. My heart raced with joy . 

No dream, 1 thought, the waking truth at last!" 

At those words 
Dawn rose on her golden throne in a sudden gleam of light. 
And great Odysseus caught the sound of his wife's cry 
and began to daydream — deep in his heart it seemed 
she stood beside him, knew him, now, at last ... 
Gathering up the fleece and blankets where he'd slept, 
he laid them on a chair in the hall, he took the oxhide out 
and spread it down, lifted his hands and prayed to Zeus: 
"Father Zeus, if you really willed it so — ^to bring me 
home over land and sea-lanes, home to native ground 
after all the pain you brought me — show me a sign, 
a good omen voiced by someone awake indoors, 
another sign, outside, from Zeus himself!" 

And Zeus in all his wisdom heard that prayer. 
He thundered at once, out of his clear blue heavens 
high above the clouds, and Odysseus' spirit lifted. 
Then from within the halls a woman grinding grain 
let fly a lucky word. Close at hand she was, 
where the good commander set the handmills once 



and now twelve women in all performed their tasks, 

grinding the wheat and barley, marrow of men's bones. 

The rest were abed by now — they 'd milled their stint — 

this one alone, the frailest of all, kept working on. 

Stopping her mill, she spoke an omen for her master: 

"Zeus, Father! King of gods and men, now there 

was a crack of thunder out of the starry sky — 

and not a cloud in sight! 

Sure it's a sign you're showing someone now. 

So, poor as 1 am, grant mern^ prayer as well: 

let this day be the last, the last these suitors 

bolt their groaning feasts in King Odysseus' house! 

These brutes who break my knees — heart-wrenching labor, 

grinding their grain — now let them eat their last! " 

A lucky omen, linked with Zeus's thunder. 
Odysseus' heart leapt up, the man convinced 
he'd grind the scoundrels' lives out in revenge. 

By now 

the other maids were gathering in Odysseus' royal palace, 
raking up on the hearth the fire still going strong. 
Telemachus climbed from bed and dressed at once, 
brisk as a young god — 

over his shoulder he slung his well-honed sword, 
he fastened rawhide sandals under his smooth feet, 
he seized his tough spear tipped with a bronze point 
and took his stand at the threshold, calling Eury cleia: 
"Dear nurse, how did you treat the stranger in our house? 
With bed and board? Or leave him to lie untended? 
That would be mother's way — sensible as she is — 
all impulse, doting over some worthless stranger, 
turning a good man out to face the worst." 

"Please, child," his calm old nurse replied, 
"don't blame Aer— your mother's blameless this time. 
He sat and drank his wine till he'd had his fill. 
Food? He'd lost his hunger. But she asked him. 



And when it was time to think of turning in, 
she told the maids to spread a decent bed, but he — 
so down-and-out, poor soul, so dogged by fate — 
said no to snuggling into a bed, between covers. 
No sir, the man lay down in the entrance-hall, 
on the raw hide of an ox and sheep's fleece, 
and we threw a blanket over him, so we did. " 

Hearing that, 

Telemachus strode out through the palace, spear in hand, 
and a pair of sleek hounds went trotting at his heels. 
He made for the meeting grounds to join the island lords 
while Eurycleia the daughter of Ops, Pisenor's son, 
that best of women, gave the maids their orders: 
"Quick now, look alive, sweep out the house, 
wet down the floors! 

You, those purple coverlets, 
fling them over the fancy chairs! 

All those tables, 
sponge them down — scour the winebowls, burnished cups! 
The rest — now off you go to the spring and fetch some water, 
fast as your legs can run! 

Our young gallants won't be long from the palace, 
they'll be bright and early — ^today's a public feast." 

They hung on her words and ran to do her bidding. 
Full twenty scurried off to the spring's dark water, 
others bent to the housework, all good hands. 
Then in they trooped, the strutting serving-men, 
who split the firewood cleanly now as the women 
bustled in from the spring, the swineherd at their heels, 
driving three fat porkers, the best of all his herds. 
And leaving them to root in the broad courtyard, 
up he went to Odysseus, hailed him warmly: 
"Friend, do the suitors show you more respect 
or treat you like the dregs of the earth as always?" 



"Good Eumaeus, " the crafty man replied, 
"if only the gods would pay back their outrage! 
Wild and reckless young cubs, conniving here 
in another's house. They've got no sense of shame." 

And now as the two confided in each other, 
the goatherd Melanthius sauntered toward them, 
herding his goats with a pair of drovers' help, 
the pick of his flocks to make the suitors' meal. 
Under the echoing porch he tethered these, then turned 
on Odysseus once again with cutting insults: "Still alive? 
Still hounding your betters, begging round the house? 
Why don't you cart yourself away? Get out! 
We'll never part, 1 swear, 
till we taste each other's fists. Riffraff, 
you and your begging make us sick! Get out — 
we're hardly the only banquet on the island." 

No reply. The wily one just shook his head, 
silent, his mind churning with thoughts of bloody work ... 

Third to arrive was Philoetius, that good cowherd, 
prodding in for the crowd a heifer and fat goats. 
Boatmen had brought them over from the mainland, 
crews who ferry across all travelers too, 
whoever comes for passage. 
Under the echoing porch he tethered all heads well 
and then approached the swineherd, full of questions: 
"Who's this stranger, Eumaeus, just come to the house? 
What roots does the man claim — who are his people? 
Where are his blood kin? his father's fields? 
Poor beggar. But what a build — a royal king's! 
Ah, once the gods weave trouble into our lives 
they drive us across the earth, they drown us all in pain, 
even kings of the realm." 

And with that thought 
he walked up to Odysseus, gave him his right hand 
and winged a greeting: "Cheers, old friend, old father, 
here's to your luck, great days from this day on — 



saddled now as you are with so much trouble! 

Father Zeus, no god's more deadly than you. 

No mercy for men, you give them life yourself 

then plunge them into misery, brutal hardship. 

1 broke into sweat, my friend, when 1 first saw you — 

see, my eyes still brim with tears, remembering him, 

Odysseus ... He must wear such rags, 1 know it, 

knocking about, drifting through the world 

if he's still alive and sees the light of day. 

If he's dead already, lost in the House of Death, 

my heart aches for Odysseus, my great lord and master. 

He set me in charge of his herds, in Cephallenian country, 

when 1 was just a youngster. How they've grown by now, 

past counting! No mortal on earth could breed 

a finer stock of oxen — broad in the brow, 

they thrive like ears of corn. But just look, 

these interlopers tell me to drive them in 

for their own private feasts. Not a thought 

for the young prince in the house, they never flinch — 

no regard for the gods' wrath — in their mad rush 

to carve up his goods, my master gone so long! 

I'm tossed from horn to horn in my own mind ... 

What a traitor I'd be, with the prince alive, 

if I'd run off to some other country, herds and all, 

to a new set of strangers. Ah, but isn't it worse 

to hold out here, tending the herds for upstarts, 

not their owners — suffering all the pains of hell? 

1 could have fled, ages ago, to some great king 

who'd give me shelter. It's unbearable here. 

True, but 1 still dream of my old master, 

unlucky man — if only hd& drop in from the blue 

and drive these suitors all in a rout throughout the halls!" 

"Cowherd," the cool tactician Odysseus answered, 
"you're no coward, and nobody's fool, I'd say. 
Even 1 can see there's sense in that old head. 
So 1 tell you this on my solemn, binding oath: 
1 swear by Zeus, the first of all the gods — 



by the table of hospitality waiting for us, 
by Odysseus' hearth where 1 have come for help, 
Odysseus will come home while you're still here. 
You'll see with your own eyes, if you have the heart, 
these suitors who lord it here cut down in blood. " 

"Stranger, if only," the cowherd cried aloud, 
"if only Zeus would make that oath come true — 
you'd see my power, my fighting arms in action!" 

Eumaeus echoed his prayer to all the gods 
that their wise king would soon come home again. 

Now as they spoke and urged each other on, 
and once more the suitors were plotting certain doom 
for the young prince — suddenly, banking high on the left 
an omen flew past, an eagle clutching a trembling dove. 
And Amphinomus rose in haste to warn them all, 
"My friends, we'll never carry off this plot 
to kill the prince. Let's concentrate on feasting." 

His timely invitation pleased them all. 
The suitors ambled into Odysseus' royal house 
and flinging down their cloaks on a chair or bench, 
they butchered hulking sheep and fatted goats, 
full-grown hogs and a young cow from the herd. 
They roasted all the innards, served them round 
and filled the bowls with wine and mixed it well. 
Eumaeus passed out cups; Philoetius, trusty herdsman, 
brought on loaves of bread in ample wicker trays; 
Melanthius poured the wine. The whole company 
reached out for the good things that lay at hand. 

Telemachus, maneuvering shrewdly, sat his father down 
on the stone threshold, just inside the timbered hall, 
and set a rickety stool and cramped table there. 
He gave him a share of innards, poured his wine 



in a golden cup and added a bracing invitation: 

"Now sit right there. Drink your wine with the crowd. 

I'll defend you from all their taunts and blows, 

these young bucks. This is no public place, 

this is Odysseus 'house — 

my father won it for me, so it's mine. 

You suitors, control yourselves. No insults now, 

no brawling, no, or it's war between us all." 

So he declared. And they all bit their lips, 
amazed the prince could speak with so much daring. 
Only Eupithes' son Antinous ventured, 
"Fighting words, but do let's knuckle under — 
to our prince. Such abuse, such naked threats! 
But clearly Zeus has foiled us. Or long before 
we would have shut his mouth for him in the halls, 
fluent and flowing as he is. " 

So he mocked. 

Telemachus paid no heed. 

And now through the streets 
the heralds passed, leading the beasts marked out 
for sacrifice on Apollo's grand festal day, 
and the islanders with their long hair were filing 
into the god's shady grove — ^the distant deadly Archer. 

Those in the palace, once they'd roasted the prime cuts, 
pulled them off the spits and, sharing out the portions, 
fell to the royal feast ... 

The men who served them gave Odysseus his share, 
fair as the helping they received themselves. 
So Telemachus ordered, the king's own son. 

But Athena had no mind to let the brazen suitors 
hold back now from their heart-rending insults — 
she meant to make the anguish cut still deeper 
into the core of Laertes' son Odysseus. 
There was one among them, a lawless boor — 



Ctesippus was his name, he made his home in Same, 
a fellow so impressed with his own astounding wealth 
he courted the wife of Odysseus, gone for years. 
Now the man harangued his swaggering comrades: 
"Listen to me, my fine friends, here's what /say! 
From the start our guest has had his fair share — 
it's only right, you know. 
How impolite it would be, how wrong to scant 
whatever guest Telemachus welcomes to his house. 
Look here, I'll give him a proper guest-gift too, 
a prize he can hand the crone who bathes his feet 
or a tip for another slave who haunts the halls 
of our great king Odysseus! " 

On that note, 
grabbing an oxhoof out of a basket where it lay, 
with a brawny hand he flung it straight at the king — 
but Odysseus ducked his head a little, dodging the blow, 
and seething just as the oxhoof hit the solid wall 
he clenched his teeth in a wry sardonic grin. 
Telemachus dressed Ctesippus down at once: 
"Ctesippus, you can thank your lucky stars 
you missed our guest — he ducked your blow, by god! 
Else 1 would have planted my sharp spear in your bowels — 
your father would have been busy with your funeral, 
not your wedding here. Enough. 
Don't let me see more offenses in my house, 
not from anyone! I'm alive to it all, now, 
the good and the bad — ^the boy you knew is gone. 
But 1 still must bear with this, this JoveJy sight ... 
sheepflocks butchered, wine swilled, food squandered — 
how can a man fight off so many single-handed? 
But no more of your crimes against me, please! 
Unless you're bent on cutting me down, now, 
and I'd rather die, yes, better that by far 
than have to look on at your outrage day by day: 
guests treated to blows, men dragging the serving-women 
through our noble house, exploiting them all, no shame!" 



Dead quiet. The suitors all fell silent, hushed. 
At last Damastor's son Agelaus rose and said, 
"Fair enough, my friends; when a man speaks well 
we have no grounds for wrangling, no cause for abuse. 
Hands off this stranger! Or any other servant 
in King Odysseus' palace. But now a word 
of friendly advice for Telemachus and his mother — 
here's hoping it proves congenial to them both. 
So long as your hearts still kept a spark alive 
that Odysseus would return — that great, deep man — 
who could blame you, playing the waiting game at home 
and holding off the suitors? The better course, it's true. 
What if Odysseus Jiadreturned, had made it home at last? 
But now it's clear as day — the man will come no more. 
So go, Telemachus, sit with your mother, coax her 
to wed the best man here, the one who offers most, 
so you can have and hold your father's estate, 
eating and drinking here, your mind at peace 
while mother plays the wife in another's house." 

The young prince, keeping his poise, replied, 
"1 swear by Zeus, Agelaus, by all my father suffered — 
dead, no doubt, or wandering far from Ithaca these days — 
1 don't delay my mother's marriage, not a moment, 
1 press her to wed the man who takes her heart. 
I'll shower her myself with boundless gifts. 
But 1 shrink from driving mother from our house, 
issuing harsh commands against her will. 
God forbid it ever comes to tJiatf 

So he vowed 

and Athena set off uncontrollable laughter in the suitors, 
crazed them out of their minds — mad, hysterical laughter 
seemed to break from the jaws of strangers, not their own, 
and the meat they were eating oozed red with blood — 
tears flooded their eyes, hearts possessed by grief. 
The inspired seer Theoclg menus wailed out in their midst, 
"Poor men, what terror is tAJsthat overwhelms you so? 



Night shrouds your heads, your faces, down to your knees — 
cries of mourning are bursting into fire — cheeks rivering tears — 
the walls and the handsome crossbeams dripping dank with blood! 
Ghosts, look, thronging the entrance, thronging the court, 
go trooping down to the realm of death and darkness! 
The sun is blotted out of the sky — look there — 
a lethal mist spreads all across the earth! " 

At that 

they all broke into peals of laughter aimed at the seer — 
Polybus' son Eurymachus braying first and foremost, 
"Our guest just in from abroad, the man is raving! 
Quick, my boys, hustle him out of the house, 
into the meeting grounds, the light of day — 
everything Aerehe thinks is dark as night!" 

"Eurymachus," the inspired prophet countered, 
"when 1 want your escort, I'll ask for it myself. 
1 have eyes and ears, and both my feet, still, 
and a head that's fairly sound, 
nothing to be ashamed of. These will do 
to take me past those doors ... 

Oh 1 can see it now — 
the disaster closing on you all! There's no escaping it, 
no way out — not for a single one of you suitors, 
wild reckless fools, plotting outrage here, 
the halls of Odysseus, great and strong as a god!" 

With that he marched out of the sturdy house 
and went home to Piraeus, the host who warmed him in. 
Now all the suitors, trading their snide glances, started 
heckling Telemachus, made a mockery of his guests. 
One or another brash young gallant scoffed, 
"Telemachus, no one's more unlucky with his guests!" 



"Look what your man dragged in — this mangy tramp 
scraping for bread and wine!" 

"Not fit for good hard work, 

the bag of bones — " 

"A useless dead weight on the land! " 

"And then this charlatan up and apes the prophet." 

"Take it from me — you'll be better off by far — 
toss your friends in a slave-ship — " 

"Pack them off 
to Sicily, fast — they'll fetch you one sweet price!" 

So they jeered, but the prince paid no attention ... 
silent, eyes riveted on his father, always waiting 
the moment he'd lay hands on that outrageous mob. 

And all the while Icarius' daughter, wise Penelope, 
had placed her carved chair within earshot, at the door, 
so she could catch each word they uttered in the hall. 
Laughing rowdily, men prepared their noonday meal, 
succulent, rich — ^they'd butchered quite a herd. 
But as for supper, what could be less enticing 
than what a goddess and a powerful man 
would spread before them soon? A groaning feast — 
for they'd been first to plot their vicious crimes. 



 



Odysseus Strings 
His Bow 



The time had come. The goddess Athena with her blazing eyes 

inspired Penelope, Icarius' daughter, wary, poised, 

to set the bow and the gleaming iron axes out 

before her suitors waiting in Odysseus' hall — 

to test their skill and bring their slaughter on. 

Up the steep stairs to her room she climbed 

and grasped in a steady hand the curved key — 

fine bronze, with ivory haft attached — 

and then with her chamber-women made her way 

to a hidden storeroom, far in the palace depths, 

and there they lay, the royal master's treasures: 

bronze, gold and a wealth of hard wrought iron 

and there it lay as well ... his backsprung bow 

with its quiver bristling arrows, shafts of pain. 

Gifts from the old days, from a friend he'd met 



in Lacedaemon — Iphitus, Eurytus' gallant son. 

Once in Messene the two struck up together, 

in sly Ortilochus' house, that time Odysseus 

went to collect a debt the whole realm owed him, 

for Messenian raiders had lifted flocks from Ithaca, 

three hundred head in their oarswept ships, the herdsmen too. 

So his father and island elders sent Odysseus off, 

a young boy on a mission, 

a distant embassy made to right that wrong. 

Iphitus went there hunting the stock that Jiehad lost, 

a dozen mares still nursing their hardy suckling mules. 

The same mares that would prove his certain death 

when he reached the son of Zeus, that iron heart, 

Heracles — the past master of monstrous works — 

who killed the man, a guest in his own house. 

Brutal. Not a care for the wrathful eyes of god 

or rites of hospitality he had spread before him, 

no, he dined him, then he murdered him, commandeered 

those hard-hoofed mares for the hero's own grange. 

Still on the trail of these when he met Odysseus, 

Iphitus gave him the bow his father, mighty Eurytus, 

used to wield as a young man, but when he died 

in his lofty house he left it to his son. 

In turn, Odysseus gave his friend a sharp sword 

and a rugged spear to mark the start of friendship, 

treasured ties that bind. But before they got to know 

the warmth of each other's board, the son of Zeus 

had murdered Iphitus, Eurytus' magnificent son 

who gave the prince the bow. 

That great weapon — 
King Odysseus never took it abroad with him 
when he sailed off to war in his long black ships. 
He kept it stored away in his stately house, 
guarding the memory of a cherished friend, 
and only took that bow on hunts at home. 

Now, 

the lustrous queen soon reached the hidden vault 
and stopped at the oaken doorsill, work an expert 



sanded smooth and trued to the Une some years ago, 

planting the doorjambs snugly, hanging shining doors. 

At once she loosed the thong from around its hook, 

inserted the key and aiming straight and true, 

shot back the bolts — and the rasping doors groaned 

as loud as a bull will bellow, champing grass at pasture. 

So as the key went home those handsome double doors 

rang out now and sprang wide before her. 

She stepped onto a plank where chests stood tall, 

brimming with clothing scented sweet with cedar. 

Reaching, tiptoe, lifting the bow down off its peg, 

still secure in the burnished case that held it, 

down she sank, laying the case across her knees, 

and dissolved in tears with a high thin wail 

as she drew her husband's weapon from its sheath ... 

Then, having wept and sobbed to her heart's content, 

off she went to the hall to meet her proud admirers, 

cradling her husband's backsprung bow in her arms, 

its quiver bristling arrows, shafts of pain. 

Her women followed, bringing a chest that held 

the bronze and the iron axes, trophies won by the master. 

That radiant woman, once she reached her suitors, 

drawing her glistening veil across her cheeks, 

paused now where a column propped the sturdy roof, 

with one of her loyal handmaids stationed either side, 

and delivered an ultimatum to her suitors: 

"Listen to me, my overbearing friends! 

You who plague this palace night and day, 

drinking, eating us out of house and home 

with the lord and master absent, gone so long — 

the only excuse that you can offer is your zest 

to win me as your bride. So, to arms, my gallants! 

Here is the prize at issue, right before you, look — 

1 set before you the great bow of King Odysseus now! 

The hand that can string this bow with greatest ease, 

that shoots an arrow clean through all twelve axes — 

he is the man 1 follow, yes, forsaking this house 

where 1 was once a bride, this gracious house 



so filled with the best that life can offer — 
1 shall always remember it, that I know ... 
even in my dreams." 

She turned to Eumaeus, 
ordered the good swineherd now to set the bow 
and the gleaming iron axes out before the suitors. 
He broke into tears as he received them, laid them down. 
The cowherd wept too, when he saw his master's bow. 
But Antinous wheeled on both and let them have it: 
"Yokels, fools — you can't tell night from day! 
You mawkish idiots, why are you sniveling here? 
You're stirring up your mistress! Isn't she drowned 
in grief already? She's lost her darling husband. 
Sit down. Eat in peace, or take your snuffling 
out of doors! But leave that bow right here — 
our crucial test that makes or breaks us all. 
No easy game, 1 wager, to string A75 polished bow. 
Not a soul in the crowd can match Odysseus — 
what a man he was ... 
1 saw him once, remember him to this day, 
though 1 was young and foolish way back then." 

Smooth talk, 
but deep in the suitor's heart his hopes were bent 
on stringing the bow and shooting through the axes. 
Antinous — fated to be the first man to taste 
an arrow whipped from great Odysseus' hands, 
the king he mocked, at ease in the king's house, 
egging comrades on to mock him too. 

"Amazing!" 
Prince Telemachus waded in with a laugh: 
"Zeus up there has robbed me of my wits. 
My own dear mother, sensible as she is, 
says she'll marry again, forsake our house, 
and look at /ne— laughing for all I'm worth, 
giggling like some fool. Step up, my friends! 
Here is the prize at issue, right before you, look — 
a woman who has no equal now in all Achaean country, 
neither in holy Pylos, nor in Argos or Mycenae, 



not even Ithaca itself or the loamy mainland. 

You know it well. Why sing my mother 's praises? 

Come, let the games begin! No dodges, no delays, 

no turning back from the stringing of the bow — 

we'll see who wins, we will. 

I'd even take a crack at the bow myself ... 

If 1 string it and shoot through all the axes, 

I'd worry less if my noble mother left our house 

with another man and left me here behind — man enough 

at last to win my father's splendid prizes!" 

With that 

he leapt to his feet and dropped his bright red cloak, 

slipping the sword and sword-belt off his shoulders. 

First he planted the axes, digging a long trench, 

one for all, and trued them all to a line, 

then tamped the earth to bed them. Wonder took 

the revelers looking on: his work so firm, precise, 

though he'd never seen the axes ranged before. 

He stood at the threshold, poised to try the bow ... 

Three times he made it shudder, straining to bend it, 

three times his power flagged — but his hopes ran high 

he'd string his father's bow and shoot through every iron 

and now, struggling with all his might for the fourth time, 

he wouJdhave strung the bow, but Odysseus shook his head 

and stopped him short despite his tensing zeal. 

"God help me," the inspired prince cried out, 

"must 1 be a weakling, a failure all my life? 

Unless I'm just too young to trust my hands 

to fight off any man who rises up against me. 

Come, my betters, so much stronger than /am — 

try the bow and finish off the contest." 

He propped his father's weapon on the ground, 
tilting it up against the polished well-hung doors 
and resting a shaft aslant the bow's fine horn, 
then back he went to the seat that he had left. 
"Up, friends!" Antinous called, taking over. 
"One man after another, left to right. 



starting from where the steward pours the wine. " 

So Antinous urged and all agreed. 
The first man up was Leodes, Oenops' son, 
a seer who could see their futures in the smoke, 
who always sat by the glowing winebowl, well back, 
the one man in the group who loathed their reckless ways, 
appalled by all their outrage. His turn first ... 
Picking up the weapon now and the swift arrow, 
he stood at the threshold, poised to try the bow 
but failed to bend it. As soon as he tugged the string 
his hands went slack, his soft, uncallused hands, 
and he called back to the suitors, "Friends, 
/can't bend it. Take it, someone — try. 
Here is a bow to rob our best of life and breath, 
all our best contenders! Still, better be dead 
than live on here, never winning the prize 
that tempts us all — forever in pursuit, 
burning with expectation every day. 
If there's still a suitor here who hopes, 
who aches to marry Penelope, Odysseus' wife, 
just let him try the bow; he'll see the truth! 
He'll soon lay siege to another Argive woman 
trailing her long robes, and shower her with gifts — 
and then our queen can marry the one who offers most, 
the man marked out by fate to be her husband. " 

With those words he thrust the bow aside, 
tilting it up against the polished well-hung doors 
and resting a shaft aslant the bow's fine horn, 
then back he went to the seat that he had left. 
But Antinous turned on the seer, abuses flying: 
"Leodes! what are you saying? what's got past your lips? 
What awful, grisly nonsense — it shocks me to hear it — 
'here is a bow to rob our best of life and breath!' 
Just because can't string it, you're, so weak? 
Clearly your genteel mother never bred her boy 
for the work of bending bows and shooting arrows. 



We have champions in our ranks to string it quickly. 

Hop to it, Melanthius!" — he barked at the goatherd — 

"Rake the fire in the hall, pull up a big stool, 

heap it with fleece and fetch that hefty ball 

of lard from the stores inside. So we young lords 

can heat and limber the bow and rub it down with grease 

before we try again and finish off the contest!" 

The goatherd bustled about to rake the fire 
still going strong. He pulled up a big stool, 
heaped it with fleece and fetched the hefty ball 
of lard from the stores inside. And the young men 
limbered the bow, rubbing it down with hot grease, 
then struggled to bend it back but failed. No use — 
they fell far short of the strength the bow required. 
Antinous still held off, dashing Eurymachus too, 
the ringleaders of all the suitors, 
head and shoulders the strongest of the lot. 

But now 

the king's two men, the cowherd and the swineherd, 
had slipped out of the palace side-by-side 
and great Odysseus left the house to join them. 
Once they were past the courtyard and the gates 
he probed them deftly, surely: "Cowherd, swineherd, 
what, shall 1 blurt this out or keep it to myself? 
No, speak out. The heart inside me says so. 
How far would you go to fight beside Odysseus? 
Say he dropped like tJiat from a clear blue sky 
and a god brought him back — 
would you fight for the suitors or your king? 
Tell me how you feel inside your hearts." 

"Father Zeus," the trusty cowherd shouted, 
"bring my prayer to pass! Let the master come — 
some god guide him now! You'd see my power, 
my fighting arms in action!" 



Eumaeus echoed his prayer to all the gods 
that their wise king would soon come home again. 
Certain at least these two were loyal to the death, 
Odysseus reassured them quickly: "I'm right here, 
here in the flesh — myself — and home at last, 
after bearing twenty years of brutal hardship. 
Now 1 know that of all my men you two alone 
longed for my return. From the rest I've heard 
not one real prayer that 1 come back again. 
So now I'll tell you what's in store for you. 
If a god beats down the lofty suitors at my hands, 
I'll find you wives, both of you, grant you property, 
sturdy houses beside my own, and in my eyes you'll be 
comrades to Prince Telemachus, brothers from then on. 
Come, I'll show you something — living proof — 
know me for certain, put your minds at rest. 

This scar, 

look, where a boar's white tusk gored me, years ago, 
hunting on Parnassus, Autolycus' sons and 1. ' 

With that, 

pushing back his rags, he revealed the great scar ... 

And the men gazed at it, scanned it, knew it well, 

broke into tears and threw their arms around their master — 

lost in affection, kissing his head and shoulders, 

and so Odysseus kissed their heads and hands. 

Now the sun would have set upon their tears 

if Odysseus had not called a halt himself. 

"No more weeping. Coming out of the house 

a man might see us, tell the men inside. 

Let's slip back in — singly, not in a pack. 

I'll go first. You're next. Here's our signal. 

When all the rest in there, our lordly friends, 

are dead against my having the bow and quiver, 

good Eumaeus, carry the weapon down the hall 

and put it in my hands. Then tell the serving-women 

to lock the snugly fitted doors to their own rooms. 

If anyone hears from there the jolting blows 

and groans of men, caught in our huge net, 

not one of them show her face — 



sit tight, keep to her weaving, not a sound. 
You, my good Philoetius, here are your orders. 
Shoot the bolt of the courtyard's outer gate, 
lock it, lash it fast." 

With that command 
the master entered his well-constructed house 
and back he went to the stool that he had left. 
The king's two men, in turn, slipped in as well. 

Just now Eurymachus held the bow in his hands, 
turning it over, tip to tip, before the blazing fire 
to heat the weapon. But he failed to bend it even so 
and the suitor's high heart groaned to bursting. 
"A black day , " he exclaimed in wounded pride, 
"a blow to myself, a blow to each man here! 
It's less the marriage that mortifies me now — 
that's galling too, but lots of women are left, 
some in seagirt Ithaca, some in other cities. 
What breaks my heart is the fact we fall so short 
of great Odysseus' strength we cannot string his bow. 
A disgrace to ring in the ears of men to come." 

"Eurymachus," Eupithes' son Antinous countered, 
"it will never come to that, as you well know. 
Today is a feast-day up and down the island 
in honor of the Archer God. Who flexes bows today? 
Set it aside. Rest easy now. And all the axes, 
let's just leave them planted where they are. 
Trust me, no one's about to crash the gates 
of Laertes' son and carry off these trophies. 
Steward, pour some drops for the god in every cup, 
we'll tip the wine, then put the bow to bed. 
And first thing in the morning have Melanthius 
bring the pick of his goats from all his herds 
so we can burn the thighs to Apollo, god of archers — 
then try the bow and finish off the contest." 

Welcome advice. And again they all agreed. 



Heralds sprinkled water over their hands for rinsing, 
the young men brimmed the mixing bowls with wine, 
they tipped first drops for the god in every cup, 
then poured full rounds for all. And now, once 
they'd tipped libations out and drunk their fill, 
the king of craft, Odysseus, said with all his cunning, 
"Listen to me, you lords who court the noble queen. 
1 have to say what the heart inside me urges. 
1 appeal especially to Eurymachus, and you, 
brilliant Antinous, who spoke so shrewdly now. 
Give the bow a rest for today, leave it to the gods — 
at dawn the Archer God will grant a victory 
to the man he favors most. 

For the moment, 
give me the polished bow now, won't you? So, 
to amuse you all, 1 can try my hand, my strength ... 
is the old force still alive inside these gnarled limbs? 
Or has a life of roaming, years of rough neglect, 
destroyed it long ago?" 

Modest words 
that sent them all into hot, indignant rage, 
fearing he just might string the polished bow. 
So Antinous rounded on him, dressed him down: 
"Not a shred of sense in your head, you filthy drifter! 
Not content to feast at your ease with us, the island's pride? 
Never denied your full share of the banquet, never, 
you can listen in on our secrets. No one else 
can eavesdrop on our talk, no tramp, no beggar. 
The wine has overpowered you, heady wine — 
the ruin of many another man, whoever 
gulps it down and drinks beyond his limit. 
Wine — it drove the Centaur, famous Eurytion, 
mad in the halls of lionhearted Pirithous. 
There to visit the Lapiths, crazed with wine 
the headlong Centaur bent to his ugly work 
in the prince's own house! His hosts sprang up, 
seized with fury, dragged him across the forecourt, 
flung him out of doors, hacking his nose and ears off 



with their knives, no mercy. The creature reeled away, 
still blind with drink, his heart like a wild storm, 
loaded with all the frenzy in his mind! 

And so 

the feud between mortal men and Centaurs had its start. 

But the drunk was first to bring disaster on himself 

by drowning in his cups. You too, 1 promise you 

no end of trouble if you should string that bow. 

You'll meet no kindness in our part of the world — 

we'll sail you off in a black ship to Echetus, 

the mainland king who wrecks all men alive. 

Nothing can save you from his royal grip! 

So drink, but hold your peace, 

don't take on the younger, stronger men. " 

"Antinous, " watchful Penelope stepped in, 
"how impolite it would be, how wrong, to scant 
whatever guest Telemachus welcomes to his house. 
You really think — if the stranger trusts so to his hands 
and strength that he strings Odysseus' great bow — 
he'll take me home and claim me as his bride? 
/fe never dreamed of such a thing, I'm sure. 
Don't let that ruin the feast for any reveler here. 
Unthinkable — nothing, nothing could be worse." 

Polybus' son Eurymachus had an answer: 
"Wise Penelope, daughter of Icarius, do we really 
expect the man to wed you? Unthinkable, 1 know. 
But we do recoil at the talk of men and women. 
One of the island's meaner sort will mutter, 
'Look at the riffraff courting a king's wife. 
Weaklings, look, they can't even string his bow. 
But along came this beggar, drifting out of the blue — 
strung his bow with ease and shot through all the axes!' 
Gossip will fly. We'll hang our heads in shame." 



"Shame?' alert Penelope protested — 
"How can you hope for any public fame at all? 
You who disgrace, devour a great man's house and home! 
Why hang your heads in shame over next to nothing? 
Our friend here is a strapping, well-built man 
and claims to be the son of a noble father. 
Come, hand him the bow now, let's just see ... 
1 tell you this — and I'll make good my word — 
if he strings the bow and Apollo grants him glory, 
I'll dress him in shirt and cloak, in handsome clothes, 
I'll give him a good sharp lance to fight off men and dogs, 
give him a two-edged sword and sandals for his feet 
and send him off, wherever his heart desires." 

"Mother," 

poised Telemachus broke in now, "my father's bow — 

no Achaean on earth has more right than 1 

to give it or withhold it, as 1 please. 

Of all the lords in Ithaca's rocky heights 

or the islands facing Elis grazed by horses, 

not a single one will force or thwart my will, 

even if 1 decide to give our guest \Ms bow — 

a gift outright — to carry off himself. 

So, mother, 

go back to your quarters. Tend to your own tasks, 
the distaff and the loom, and keep the women 
working hard as well. As for the bow now, 
men will see to that, but 1 most of all: 
/hold the reins of power in this house. " 

Astonished, 

she withdrew to her own room. She took to heart 
the clear good sense in what her son had said. 
Climbing up to the lofty chamber with her women, 
she fell to weeping for Odysseus, her beloved husband, 
till watchful Athena sealed her eyes with welcome sleep. 



And now the loyal swineherd had lifted up the bow, 
was taking it toward the king, when all the suitors 
burst out in an ugly uproar through the palace — 
brash young bullies, this or that one heckling, 
"Where on earth are you going with that bow?" 

"You, you grubby swineherd, are you crazy?" 

"The speedy dogs you reared will eat your corpse — " 

"Out there with your pigs, out in the cold, alone!" 

"If only Apollo and all the gods shine down on us!' 

Eumaeus froze in his tracks, put down the bow, 
panicked by every outcry in the hall. 
Telemachus shouted too, from the other side, 
and full of threats: "Carry on with the bow, old boy! 
If you serve too many masters, you'll soon suffer. 
Look sharp, or I'll pelt you back to your farm 
with flying rocks. 1 may be younger than you 
but I'm much stronger. If only 1 had that edge 
in fists and brawn over all this courting crowd, 
I'd soon dispatch them — licking their wounds at last — 
clear of our palace where they plot their vicious plots!" 

His outburst sent them all into gales of laughter, 
blithe and oblivious, that dissolved their pique 
against the prince. The swineherd took the bow, 
carried it down the hall to his ready, waiting king 
and standing by him, placed it in his hands, 
then he called the nurse aside and whispered, 
"Good Eurycleia — ^Telemachus commands you now 
to lock the snugly fitted doors to your own rooms. 
If anyone hears from there the jolting blows 
and groans of men, caught in our huge net, 
not one of you show your face — 
sit tight, keep to your weaving, not a sound. " 



That silenced the old nurse — 
she barred the doors that led from the long hall. 
The cowherd quietly bounded out of the house 
to lock the gates of the high-stockaded court. 
Under the portico lay a cable, ship's tough gear: 
he lashed the gates with this, then slipped back in 
and ran and sat on the stool that he'd just left, 
eyes riveted on Odysseus. 

Now heheld the bow 
in his own hands, turning it over, tip to tip, 
testing it, this way, that way ... fearing worms 
had bored through the weapon's horn with the master gone abroad. 
A suitor would glance at his neighbor, jeering, taunting, 
"Look at our connoisseur of bows! " 

"Sly old fox- 
maybe he's got bows like it, stored in Az? house." 

"That or he's bent on making one himself." 

"Look how he twists and turns it in his hands!" 

"The clever tramp means trouble — " 

"1 wish him luck," some cocksure lord chimed in, 
"as good as his luck in bending back that weapon!" 

So they mocked, but Odysseus, mastermind in action, 
once he'd handled the great bow and scanned every inch, 
then, like an expert singer skilled at lyre and song — 
who strains a string to a new peg with ease, 
making the pliant sheep-gut fast at either end — 
so with his virtuoso ease Odysseus strung his mighty bow. 
Quickly his right hand plucked the string to test its pitch 
and under his touch it sang out clear and sharp as a swallow's cry. 
Horror swept through the suitors, faces blanching white, 
and Zeus cracked the sky with a bolt, his blazing sign, 
and the great man who had borne so much rejoiced at last 
that the son of cunning Cronus flung that omen down for him. 



He snatched a winged arrow lying bare on the board — 
the rest still bristled deep inside the quiver, 
soon to be tasted by all the feasters there. 
Setting shaft on the handgrip, drawing the notch 
and bowstring back, back ... right from his stool, 
just as he sat but aiming straight and true, he let fly — 
and never missing an ax from the first ax-handle 
clean on through to the last and out 
the shaft with its weighted brazen head shot free! 

"My son," 

Odysseus looked to Telemachus and said, "your guest, 
sitting here in your house, has not disgraced you. 
No missing the mark, look, and no long labor spent 
to string the bow. My strength's not broken yet, 
not quite so frail as the mocking suitors thought. 
But the hour has come to serve our masters right — 
supper in broad daylight — then to other revels, 
song and dancing, all that crowns a feast." 

He paused with a warning nod, and at that sign 
Prince Telemachus, son of King Odysseus, 
girding his sharp sword on, clamping hand to spear, 
took his stand by a chair that flanked his father — 
his bronze spearpoint glinting now like fire ... 



 



Slaughter in 
the Hall 



Now stripping back his rags Odysseus master of craft and battle 
vaulted onto the great threshold, gripping his bow and quiver 
bristling arrows, and poured his flashing shafts before him, 
loose at his feet, and thundered out to all the suitors: 
"Look — your crucial test is finished, now, at last! 
But another target's left that no one's hit before — 
we'll see if /can hit it — ^Apollo give me glory!" 

With that he trained a stabbing arrow on Antinous ... 
just lifting a gorgeous golden loving-cup in his hands, 
just tilting the two-handled goblet back to his lips, 
about to drain the wine — and slaughter the last thing 
on the suitor's mind: who could dream that one foe 
in that crowd of feasters, however great his power, 
would bring down death on himself, and black doom? 



But Odysseus aimed and shot Antinous square in the throat 
and the point went stabbing clean through the soft neck and out — 
and off to the side he pitched, the cup dropped from his grasp 
as the shaft sank home, and the man's life-blood came spurting 
out his nostrils — 

thick red jets — 

a sudden thrust of his foot — 

he kicked away the table — 

food showered across the floor, 
the bread and meats soaked in a swirl of bloody filth. 
The suitors burst into uproar all throughout the house 
when they saw their leader down. They leapt from their seats, 
milling about, desperate, scanning the stone walls — 
not a shield in sight, no rugged spear to seize. 
They wheeled on Odysseus, lashing out in fury: 
"Stranger, shooting at men will cost your life!" 

"Your game is over — you, you've shot your last!" 

"You'll never escape your own headlong death!" 

"You killed the best in Ithaca — our fine prince!" 

"Vultures will eat your corpse!" 

Groping, frantic — 
each one persuading himself the guest had killed 
the man by chance. Poor fools, blind to the fact 
that all their necks were in the noose, their doom sealed. 
With a dark look, the wily fighter Odysseus shouted back, 
"You dogs! you never imagined I'd return from Troy — 
so cocksure that you bled my house to death, 
ravished my serving-women — ^wooed my wife 
behind my back while 1 was still alive! 
No fear of the gods who rule the skies up there, 
no fear that men's revenge might arrive someday — 
now all your necks are in the noose — your doom is sealed!" 



Terror gripped them all, blanched their faces white, 
each man glancing wildly — how to escape his instant death? 
Only Eurymachus had the breath to venture, "If you, 
you're truly Odysseus of Ithaca, home at last, 
you're right to accuse these men of what they've done — 
so much reckless outrage here in your palace, 
so much on your lands. But here he lies, 
quite dead, and he incited it all — ^Antinous — 
look, the man who drove us all to crime! 
Not that he needed marriage, craved it so; 
he'd bigger game in mind — though Zeus barred his way — 
he'd lord it over Ithaca's handsome country, king himself, 
once he'd lain in wait for your son and cut him down! 
But now he's received the death that he deserved. 
So spare your own people! Later we'll recoup 
your costs with a tax laid down upon the land, 
covering all we ate and drank inside your halls, 
and each of us here will pay full measure too — 
twenty oxen in value, bronze and gold we'll give 
until we melt your heart. Before we've settled, 
who on earth could blame you for your rage?" 

But the battle-master kept on glaring, seething. 
"No, Eurymachus! Not if you paid me all your father's wealth — 
all you possess now, and all that could pour in from the world's end — 
no, not even then would 1 stay my hands from slaughter 
till all you suitors had paid for all your crimes! 
Now life or death — your choice — fight me or flee 
if you hope to escape your sudden bloody doom! 
1 doubt one man in the lot will save his skin!" 

His menace shook their knees, their hearts too 
but Eurymachus spoke again, now to the suitors: "Friends! 
This man will never restrain his hands, invincible hands — 
now that he's seized that polished bow and quiver, look, 
he'll shoot from the sill until he's killed us all! 
So fight — call up the joy of battle! Swords out! 
Tables lifted — block his arrows winging death! 
Charge him, charge in a pack — 



try to rout the man from the sill, the doors, 
race through town and sound an alarm at once — 
our friend would soon see he's shot his bolt!" 

Brave talk — 

he drew his two-edged sword, bronze, honed for the kill 
and hurled himself at the king with a raw savage cry 
in the same breath that Odysseus loosed an arrow 
ripping his breast beside the nipple so hard 
it lodged in the man's liver — 
Out of his grasp the sword dropped to the ground — 
over his table, head over heels he tumbled, doubled up, 
flinging his food and his two-handled cup across the floor — 
he smashed the ground with his forehead, writhing in pain, 
both feet flailing out, and his high seat tottered — 
the mist of death came swirling down his eyes. 

Amphinomus rushed the king in all his glory, 
charging him face-to-face, a slashing sword drawn — 
if only he could force him clear of the doorway, now, 
but Telemachus — too quick — stabbed the man from behind, 
plunging his bronze spear between the suitor's shoulders 
and straight on through his chest the point came jutting out — 
down he went with a thud, his forehead slammed the ground. 
Telemachus swerved aside, leaving his long spearshaft 
lodged in Amphinomus — fearing some suitor just might 
lunge in from behind as he tugged the shaft, 
impale him with a sword or hack him down, 
crouching over the corpse. 
He went on the run, reached his father at once 
and halting right beside him, let fly, "Father — 
now I'll get you a shield and a pair of spears, 
a helmet of solid bronze to fit your temples! 
I'll arm myself on the way back and hand out 
arms to the swineherd, arm the cowherd too — 
we'd better fight equipped!" 

"Run, fetch them," 
the wily captain urged, "while I've got arrows left 
to defend me — or they 'll force me from the doors 
while 1 fight on alone!" 



Telemachus moved to his father's orders smartly. 
Off he ran to the room where the famous arms lay stored, 
took up four shields, eight spears, four bronze helmets 
ridged with horsehair crests and, loaded with these, 
ran back to reach his father's side in no time. 
The prince was first to case himself in bronze 
and his servants followed suit — both harnessed up 
and all three flanked Odysseus, mastermind of war, 
and he, as long as he'd arrows left to defend himself, 
kept picking suitors off in the palace, one by one 
and down they went, corpse on corpse in droves. 
Then, when the royal archer's shafts ran out, 
he leaned his bow on a post of the massive doors — 
where walls of the hallway catch the light — and armed: 
across his shoulder he slung a buckler four plies thick, 
over his powerful head he set a well-forged helmet, 
the horsehair crest atop it tossing, bristling terror, 
and grasped two rugged lances tipped with fiery bronze. 

Now a side-door was fitted into the main wall — 
right at the edge of the great hall's stone sill — 
and led to a passage always shut by good tight boards. 
But Odysseus gave the swineherd strict commands 
to stand hard by the side-door, guard it well — 
the only way the suitors might break out. 
Agelaus called to his comrades with a plan: 
"Friends, can't someone climb through the hatch? — 
tell men outside to sound the alarm, be quick — 
our guest would soon see he'd shot his last!" 

The goatherd Melanthius answered, "Not a chance, 
my lord — the door to the courtyard's much too near, 
dangerous too, the mouth of the passage cramped. 
One strong man could block us, one and all! 
No, I'll fetch you some armor to harness on, 
out of the storeroom — ^there, nowhere else, I'm sure, 
the king and his gallant son have stowed their arms!" 



With that the goatherd clambered up through smoke-ducts 
high on the wall arid scurried into Odysseus' storeroom, 
bundled a dozen shields, as many spears and helmets 
ridged with horsehair crests and, loaded with these, 
rushed back down to the suitors, quickly issued arms. 
Odysseus' knees shook, his heart too, when he saw them 
buckling on their armor, brandishing long spears — 
here was a battle looming, well he knew. 
He turned at once to Telemachus, warnings flying: 
"A bad break in the fight, my boy! One of the women's 
tipped the odds against us — or could it be the goatherd? " 

"My fault, father," the cool clear prince replied, 
"the blame's all mine. That snug door to the vault, 
1 left it ajar — they've kept a better watch than 1. 
Go, Eumaeus, shut the door to the storeroom, 
check and see if it's one of the women's tricks 
or Dolius' son Melanthius. He's our man, I'd say." 

And even as they conspired, back the goatherd 
climbed to the room to fetch more burnished arms, 
but Eumaeus spotted him, quickly told his king 
who stood close by: "Odysseus, wily captain, 
there he goes again, the infernal nuisance — 
just as we suspected — back to the storeroom. 
Give me a clear command! 
Do 1 kill the man — if 1 can take him down — 
or drag him back to you, here, to pay in full 
for the dirty work he's plotted in your house?" 

Odysseus, master of tactics, answered briskly, 
"1 and the prince will keep these brazen suitors 
crammed in the hall, for all their battle-fury. 
You two wrench Melanthius' arms and legs behind him, 
fling him down in the storeroom — lash his back to a plank 
and strap a twisted cable fast to the scoundrel's body, 



hoist him up a column until he hits the rafters — 
let him dangle in agony, still alive, 
for a good long time!" 

They hung on his orders, keen to do his will. 
Off they ran to the storeroom, unseen by him inside — 
Melanthius, rummaging after arms, deep in a dark recess 
as the two men took their stand, either side the doorposts, 
poised till the goatherd tried to cross the doorsill ... 
one hand clutching a crested helmet, the other 
an ample old buckler blotched with mildew, 
the shield Laertes bore as a young soldier once — 
but there it lay for ages, seams on the handstraps split — 
Quick, they rushed him, seized him, haled him back by the hair, 
flung him down on the floor, writhing with terror, bound him 
hand and foot with a chafing cord, wrenched his limbs 
back, back till the joints locked tight — 
just as Laertes' cunning son commanded — 
they strapped a twisted cable round his body, 
hoisted him up a column until he hit the rafters, 
then you mocked him, Eumaeus, my good swineherd: 
"Now stand guard through the whole night, Melanthius — 
stretched out on a soft bed fit for you, your highness! 
You're bound to see the Morning rising up from the Ocean, 
mounting her golden throne — at just the hour you always 
drive in goats to feast the suitors in the hall!" 

So they left him, trussed in his agonizing sling; 
they clapped on armor again, shut the gleaming doors 
and ran to rejoin Odysseus, mastermind of war. 
And now as the ranks squared off, breathing fury — 
four at the sill confronting a larger, stronger force 
arrayed inside the hall — now Zeus's daughter Athena, 
taking the build and voice of Mentor, swept in 
and Odysseus, thrilled to see her, cried out, 
"Rescue us. Mentor, now it's life or death! 



Remember your old comrade — all the service 
1 offered you/ We were boys together!" 

So he cried 

yet knew in his bones it was Athena, Driver of Armies. 

But across the hall the suitors brayed against her, 

Agelaus first, his outburst full of threats: 

"Mentor, never let Odysseus trick you into 

siding with Jii'mio fight against the suitors. 

Here's our plan of action, and we will see it through! 

Once we've killed them both, the father and the son, 

we'll kill you too, for all you're bent on doing 

here in the halls — you'll pay with your own head! 

And once our swords have stopped your violence cold — 

all your property, all in your house, your fields, 

we'll lump it all with Odysseus' rich estate 

and never let your sons live on in your halls 

or free your wife and daughters to walk through town!" 

Naked threats — and Athena hit new heights of rage, 
she lashed out at Odysseus now with blazing accusations: 
"Where's it gone, Odysseus — your power, your fighting heart? 
The great soldier who fought for famous white-armed Helen, 
battling Trojans nine long years — nonstop, no mercy, 
mowing their armies down in grueling battle — 
you who seized the broad streets of Troy 
with your fine strategic stroke! How can you — 
now you've returned to your own house, your own wealth — 
bewail the loss of your combat strength in a war with suitors? 
Come, old friend, stand by me! You'll see action now, 
see how Mentor the son of Alcimus, that brave fighter, 
kills your enemies, pays you back for service!" 

Rousing words — 
but she gave no all-out turning of the tide, not yet, 
she kept on testing Odysseus and his gallant son, 
putting their force and fighting heart to proof. 
For all the world like a swallow in their sight 
she flew on high to perch 

on the great hall's central roof beam black with smoke. 



But the suitors closed ranks, commanded now by Damastor's 

sonAgelaus, flanked by Eurynomus, Demoptolemus and Amphimedon, 

Pisander, Polyctor's son, and Poly bus ready, waiting — 

head and shoulders the best and bravest of the lot 

still left to fight for their lives, 

now that the pelting shafts had killed the rest. 

Agelaus spurred his comrades on with battle-plans: 

"Friends, at last the man's invincible hands are useless! 

Mentor has mouthed some empty boasts and flitted off — 

just four are left to fight at the front doors. So now, 

no wasting your long spears — all at a single hurl, 

just six of us launch out in the first wave! 

If Zeus is willing, we may hit Odysseus, 

carry off the glory! The rest are nothing 

once the captain's down!" 

At his command, 
concentrating their shots, all six hurled as one 
but Athena sent the whole salvo wide of the mark — 
one of them hit the jamb of the great hall's doors, 
another the massive door itself, and the heavy bronze point 
of a third ashen javelin crashed against the wall. 
Seeing his men untouched by the suitors' flurry, 
steady Odysseus leapt to take command: 
"Friends! now it's for usto hurl at them, 1 say, 
into this ruck of suitors! Topping all their crimes 
they're mad to strip the armor off our bodies!" 

Taking aim at the ranks, all four let fly as one 
and the lances struck home — Odysseus killed Demoptolemus, 
Telemachus killed Euryades — the swineherd. Flatus — 
and the cowherd cut Pisander down in blood. 
They bit the dust of the broad floor, all as one. 
Back to the great hall's far recess the others shrank 
as the four rushed in and plucked up spears from corpses. 

And again the suitors hurled their whetted shafts 
but Athena sent the better part of the salvo wide — 
one of them hit the jamb of the great hall's doors, 
another the massive door itself, and the heavy bronze point 



of a third ashen javelin crashed against the wall. 

True, Amphimedon nicked Telemachus on the wrist — 

the glancing blade just barely broke his skin. 

Ctesippus sent a long spear sailing over 

Eumaeus' buckler, grazing his shoulder blade 

but the weapon skittered off and hit the ground. 

And again those led by the brilliant battle-master 

hurled their razor spears at the suitors' ranks — 

and now Odysseus raider of cities hit Eurydamas, 

Telemachus hit Amphimedon — Eumaeus, Poly bus — 

and the cowherd stabbed Ctesippus 

right in the man's chest and triumphed over his body: 

"Love your mockery, do you? Son of that blowhard Polytherses! 

No more shooting off your mouth, you idiot, such big talk — 

leave the last word to the gods — they're much stronger! 

Take this spear, this guest-gift, for the cow's hoof 

you once gave King Odysseus begging in his house!" 

So the master of longhorn cattle had his say — 
as Odysseus, fighting at close quarters, ran Agelaus 
through with a long lance — ^Telemachus speared Leocritus 
so deep in the groin the bronze came punching out his back 
and the man crashed headfirst, slamming the ground full-face. 
And now Athena, looming out of the rafters high above them, 
brandished her man-destroying shield of thunder, terrifying 
the suitors out of their minds, and down the hall they panicked — 
wild, like herds stampeding, driven mad as the darting gadfly 
strikes in the late spring when the long days come round. 
The attackers struck like eagles, crook-clawed, hook-beaked, 
swooping down from a mountain ridge to harry smaller birds 
that skim across the flatland, cringing under the clouds 
but the eagles plunge in fury, rip their lives out — hopeless, 
never a chance of flight or rescue — and people love the sport — 
so the attackers routed suitors headlong down the hall, 
wheeling into the slaughter, slashing left and right 
and grisly screams broke from skulls cracked open — 
the whole floor awash with blood. 

Leodes now — 



he flung himself at Odysseus, clutched his knees, 
crying out to the king with a sudden, winging prayer: 
"1 hug your knees, Odysseus — mercy! spare my life! 
Never, 1 swear, did 1 harass any woman in your house — 
never a word, a gesture — nothing, no, 1 tried 
to restrain the suitors, whoever did such things. 
They wouldn't listen, keep their hands to themselves — 
so reckless, so they earn their shameful fate. 
But 1 was just their prophet — 
/72Z/ hands are clean — and I'm to die their death! 
Look at the thanks 1 get for years of service! " 

A killing look, and the wry soldier answered, 
"Only a priest, a prophet for this mob, you say? 
How hard you must have prayed in my own house 
that the heady day of my return would never dawn — 
my dear wife would be yours, would bear your children! 
For ^Aa^there's no escape from grueling death — you die!" 

And snatching up in one powerful hand a sword 
left on the ground — ^Agelaus dropped it when he fell — 
Odysseus hacked the prophet square across the neck 
and the praying head went tumbling in the dust. 

Now one was left, 
trying still to escape black death. Phemius, Terpis' son, 
the bard who always performed among the suitors — 
they forced the man to sing ... 
There he stood, backing into the side-door, 
still clutching his ringing lyre in his hands, 
his mind in turmoil, torn — ^what should he do now? 
Steal from the hall and crouch at the altar-stone 
of Zeus who Guards the Court, where time and again 
Odysseus and Laertes burned the long thighs of oxen? 
Or throw himself on the master's mercy, clasp his knees? 
That was the better way — or so it struck him, yes, 
grasp the knees of Laertes' royal son. And so, 
cradling his hollow lyre, he laid it on the ground 
between the mixing-bowl and the silver-studded throne. 



then rushed up to Odysseus, yes, and clutched his knees, 
singing out to his king with a stirring, winged prayer: 
"I hug your knees, Odysseus — mercy! spare my life! 
What a grief it will be to you for all the years to come 
if you kill the singer now, who sings for gods and men. 
1 taught myself the craft, but a god has planted 
deep in my spirit all the paths of song — 
songs I'm fit to sing for you as for a god. 
Calm your bloodlust now — don't take my head! 
He'd bear me out, your own dear son Telemachus — 
never of /72z/own will, never for any gain did 1 
perform in your house, singing after the suitors 
had their feasts. They were too strong, too many — 
they forced me to come and sing — 1 had no choice! " 

The inspired Prince Telemachus heard his pleas 
and quickly said to his father close beside him, 
"Stop, don't cut him down! This one's innocent. 
So is the herald Medon — the one who always 
tended me in the house when 1 was little — 
spare him too. Unless he's dead by now, 
killed by Philoetius or Eumaeus here — 
or ran into f/f7f/ rampaging through the halls." 

The herald pricked up his anxious ears at that ... 
cautious soul, he cowered, trembling, under a chair — 
wrapped in an oxhide freshly stripped — to dodge black death. 
He jumped in a flash from there, threw off the smelly hide 
and scuttling up to Telemachus, clutching his knees, 
the herald begged for life in words that fluttered: 
"Here 1 am, dear boy — spare me! Tell your father, 
flushed with victory, not to kill me with his sword — 
enraged as he is with these young lords who bled 
his palace white and showed you no respect, 
the reckless fools!" 

Breaking into a smile 
the canny Odysseus reassured him, "Courage! 
The prince has pulled you through, he's saved you now 



so you can take it to heart and tell the next man too: 
clearly doing good puts doing bad to shame. 
Now leave the palace, go and sit outside — 
out in the courtyard, clear of the slaughter — 
you and the bard with all his many songs. 
Wait till I've done some household chores 
that call for my attention." 

The two men scurried out of the house at once 
and crouched at the altar-stone of mighty Zeus — 
glancing left and right, 
fearing death would strike at any moment. 

Odysseus scanned his house to see if any man 
still skulked alive, still hoped to avoid black death. 
But he found them one and all in blood and dust ... 
great hauls of them down and out like fish that fishermen 
drag from the churning gray surf in looped and coiling nets 
and fling ashore on a sweeping hook of beach — some noble catch 
heaped on the sand, twitching, lusting for fresh salt sea 
but the Sungod hammers down and burns their lives out ... 
so the suitors lay in heaps, corpse covering corpse. 
At last the seasoned fighter turned to his son: 
"Telemachus, go, call the old nurse here — 
1 must tell her all that's on my mind." 

Telemachus ran to do his father's bidding, 
shook the women's doors, calling Eury cleia: 
"Come out now! Up with you, good old woman! 
You who watch over all the household hands — 
quick, my father wants you, needs to have a word!" 

Crisp command that left the old nurse hushed — 
she spread the doors to the well-constructed hall, 
slipped out in haste, and the prince led her on ... 
She found Odysseus in the thick of slaughtered corpses, 
splattered with bloody filth like a lion that's devoured 
some ox of the field and lopes home, covered with blood. 



his chest streaked, both jaws gUstening, dripping red — 

a sight to strike terror. So Odysseus looked now, 

splattered with gore, his thighs, his fighting hands, 

and she, when she saw the corpses, all the pooling blood, 

was about to lift a cry of triumph — here was a great exploit, 

look — but the soldier held her back and checked her zeal 

with warnings winging home: "Rejoice in your heart, 

old woman — peace! No cries of triumph now. 

It's unholy to glory over the bodies of the dead. 

These men the doom of the gods has brought low, 

and their own indecent acts. They 'd no regard 

for any man on earth — good or bad — 

who chanced to come their way. And so, thanks 

to their reckless work, they met this shameful fate. 

Quick, report in full on the women in my halls — 

who are disloyal to me, who are guiltless? " 

"Surely, child," 
his fond old nurse replied, "now here's the truth. 
Fifty women you have inside your house, 
women we've trained to do their duties well, 
to card the wool and bear the yoke of service. 
Some dozen in all went tramping to their shame, 
thumbing their noses at me, at the queen herself! 
And Telemachus, just now come of age — his mother 
would never let the boy take charge of the maids. 
But let me climb to her well-lit room upstairs 
and tell your wife the news — 
some god has put the woman fast asleep." 

"Don't wake her yet," the crafty man returned, 
"you tell those women to hurry here at once — 
just the ones who've shamed us all along." 

Away the old nurse bustled through the house 
to give the women orders, rush them to the king. 
Odysseus called Telemachus over, both herdsmen too, 
with strict commands: "Start clearing away the bodies. 
Make the women pitch in too. Chairs and tables — 



scrub them down with sponges, rinse them clean. 
And once you've put the entire house in order, 
march the women out of the great hall — between 
the roundhouse and the courtyard's strong stockade — 
and hack them with your swords, slash out all their lives — 
blot out of their minds the joys of love they relished 
under the suitors' bodies, rutting on the sly ! " 

The women crowded in, huddling all together ... 
wailing convulsively, streaming live warm tears. 
First they carried out the bodies of the dead 
and propped them under the courtyard colonnade, 
standing them one against another. Odysseus 
shouted commands himself, moving things along, 
and they kept bearing out the bodies — they were forced. 
Next they scrubbed down the elegant chairs and tables, 
washed them with sopping sponges, rinsed them clean. 
Then Telemachus and the herdsmen scraped smooth 
the packed earth floor of the royal house with spades 
as the women gathered up the filth and piled it outside. 
And then, at last, once the entire house was put in order, 
they marched the women out of the great hall — between 
the roundhouse and the courtyard's strong stockade — 
crammed them into a dead end, no way out from there, 
and stern Telemachus gave the men their orders: 
"No clean death for the likes of them, by god! 
Not from /ne— they showered abuse on my head, 
my mother's too! 

You sluts — ^the suitors' whores!" 

With that, taking a cable used on a dark-prowed ship 
he coiled it over the roundhouse, lashed it fast to a tall column, 
hoisting it up so high no toes could touch the ground. 
Then, as doves or thrushes beating their spread wings 
against some snare rigged up in thickets — flying in 
for a cozy nest but a grisly bed receives them — 
so the women's heads were trapped in a line, 
nooses yanking their necks up, one by one 



so all might die a pitiful, ghastly death ... 
they kicked up heels for a little — not for long. 

Melanthius? 

They hauled him out through the doorway, into the court, 
lopped his nose and ears with a ruthless knife, 
tore his genitals out for the dogs to eat raw 
and in manic fury hacked off hands and feet. 

Then, 

once they 'd washed their own hands and feet, 
they went inside again to join Odysseus. 
Their work was done with now. 
But the king turned to devoted Eurycleia, saying, 
"Bring sulfur, nurse, to scour all this pollution — 
bring me fire too, so 1 can fumigate the house. 
And call Penelope here with all her women — 
tell all the maids to come back in at once." 

"Well said, my boy, " his old nurse replied, 
"right to the point. But wait, 
let me fetch you a shirt and cloak to wrap you. 
No more dawdling round the palace, nothing but rags 
to cover those broad shoulders — it's a scandal!" 

"Fire first," the good soldier answered. 
"Light me a fire to purify this house. " 

The devoted nurse snapped to his command, 
brought her master fire and brimstone. Odysseus 
purged his palace, halls and court, with cleansing fumes. 

Then back through the royal house the old nurse went 
to tell the women the news and bring them in at once. 
They came crowding out of their quarters, torch in hand, 
flung their arms around Odysseus, hugged him, home at last, 
and kissed his head and shoulders, seized his hands, and he, 
overcome by a lovely longing, broke down and wept ... 
deep in his heart he knew them one and all. 



 



The Great 
Rooted Bed 



Up to the rooms the old nurse clambered, chuckling all the way, 

to tell the queen her husband was here now, home at last. 

Her knees bustling, feet shuffling over each other, 

till hovering at her mistress' head she spoke: 

"Penelope — child — wake up and see for yourself, 

with your own eyes, all you dreamed of, all your days! 

He's here — Odysseus — he's come home, at long last! 

He's killed the suitors, swaggering young brutes 

who plagued his house, wolfed his cattle down, 

rode roughshod over his son!" 

"Dear old nurse," wary Penelope replied, 
"the gods have made you mad. They have that power, 
putting lunacy into the clearest head around 



or setting a half-wit on the path to sense. 
They've unhinged you, and you were once so sane. 
Why do you mock me? — haven't I wept enough? — 
telhng such wild stories, interrupting my sleep, 
sweet sleep that held me, sealed my eyes just now. 
Not once have 1 slept so soundly since the day 
Odysseus sailed away to see that cursed city ... 
Destroy, 1 call it — 1 hate to say its name! 
Now down you go. Back to your own quarters. 
If any other woman of mine had come to me, 
rousing me out of sleep with such a tale, 
I'd have her bundled back to her room in pain. 
It's only your old gray head that spares you that! ' 

"Never" — the fond old nurse kept pressing on — 
"dear child, I'd never mock you! No, it's all true, 
he's here — Odysseus — he's come home, just as 1 tell you! 
He'sXhe stranger they all manhandled in the hall. 
Telemachus knew he was here, for days and days, 
but he knew enough to hide his father's plans 
so could pay those vipers back in kind!" 

Penelope's heart burst in joy , she leapt from bed, 
her eyes streaming tears, she hugged the old nurse 
and cried out with an eager, winging word, 
"Please, dear one, give me the whole story. 
If he's really home again, just as you tell me, 
how did he get those shameless suitors in his clutches? — 
single-handed, braving an army always camped inside." 

"1 have no idea," the devoted nurse replied. 
"1 didn't see it, 1 didn't ask— all 1 heard 
was the choking groans of men cut down in blood. 
We crouched in terror — a dark nook of our quarters — 
all of us locked tight behind those snug doors 
till your boy Telemachus came and called me out — 
his father rushed him there to do just that. Then 
1 found Odysseus in the thick of slaughtered corpses; 



there he stood and all around him, over the beaten floor, 
the bodies sprawled in heaps, lying one on another ... 
How it would have thrilled your heart to see him — 
splattered with bloody filth, a lion with his kill! 
And now they're all stacked at the courtyard gates — 
he's lit a roaring fire, 

he's purifying the house with cleansing fumes 
and he's sent me here to bring you back to him. 
Follow me down! So now, after all the years of grief, 
you two can embark, loving hearts, along the road to joy. 
Look, your dreams, put off so long, come true at last — 
he's back alive, home at his hearth, and found you, 
found his son still here. And all those suitors 
who did him wrong, he's paid them back, he has, 
right in his own house!" 

"Hush, dear woman," 
guarded Penelope cautioned her at once. 
"Don't laugh, don't cry in triumph — not yet. 
You know how welcome the sight of him would be 
to all in the house, and to me most of all 
and the son we bore together. 
But the story can't be true, not as you tell it, 
no, it must be a god who's killed our brazen friends — 
up in arms at their outrage, heartbreaking crimes. 
They'd no regard for any man on earth — 
good or bad — ^who chanced to come their way. So, 
thanks to their reckless work they die their deaths. 
Odysseus? Far from Achaea now, he's lost all hope 
of coming home ... he's lost and gone himself." 

"Child," the devoted old nurse protested, 
"what nonsense you let slip through your teeth. 
Here's your husband, warming his hands at his own hearth, 
here — and you, you say he'll never come home again, 
always the soul of trust! All right, this too — 
I'll give you a sign, a proof that's plain as day. 
That scar, made years ago by a boar's white tusk — 
1 spotted the scar myself, when 1 washed his feet. 



and I tried to tell you, ah, but he, the crafty rascal, 

clamped his hand on my mouth — 1 couldn't say a word. 

Follow me down now. I'll stake my life on it: 

if 1 am lying to you — 

kill me with a thousand knives of pain!" 

"Dear old nurse, " composed Penelope responded, 
"deep as you are, my friend, you'll find it hard 
to plumb the plans of the everlasting gods. 
All the same, let 's go and join my son 
so 1 can see the suitors lying dead 
and see ... the one who killed them." 

With that thought 
Penelope started down from her lofty room, her heart 
in turmoil, torn ... should she keep her distance, 
probe her husband? Or rush up to the man at once 
and kiss his head and cling to both his hands? 
As soon as she stepped across the stone threshold, 
slipping in, she took a seat at the closest wall 
and radiant in the firelight, faced Odysseus now. 
There he sat, leaning against the great central column, 
eyes fixed on the ground, waiting, poised for whatever words 
his hardy wife might say when she caught sight of him. 
A long while she sat in silence ... numbing wonder 
filled her heart as her eyes explored his face. 
One moment he seemed ... Odysseus, to the life — 
the next, no, he was not the man she knew, 
a huddled mass of rags was all she saw. 

"Oh mother," Telemachus reproached her, 
"cruel mother, you with your hard heart! 
Why do you spurn my father so — ^why don't you 
sit beside him, engage him, ask him questions? 
What other wife could have a spirit so unbending? 
Holding back from her husband, home at last for her 
after bearing twenty years of brutal struggle — 
your heart was always harder than a rock!" 

"My child," 



Penelope, well-aware, explained, "I'm stunned with wonder, 

powerless. Cannot speak to him, ask him questions, 

look him in the eyes ... But if he is truly 

Odysseus, home at last, make no mistake: 

we two will know each other, even better — 

we two have secret signs, 

known to us both but hidden from the world. " 

Odysseus, long-enduring, broke into a smile 
and turned to his son with pointed, winging words: 
"Leave your mother here in the hall to test me 
as she will. She soon will know me better. 
Now because 1 am filthy, wear such grimy rags, 
she spurns me — your mother still can't bring herself 
to believe 1 am her husband. 

But you and 1, 
put heads together. What's our best defense? 
When someone kills a lone man in the realm 
who leaves behind him no great band of avengers, 
still the killer flees, goodbye to kin and country. 
But tvie brought down the best of the island's princes, 
the pillars of Ithaca. Weigh it well, 1 urge you." 

"Look to it all yourself now, father," his son 
deferred at once. "You are the best on earth, 
they say, when it comes to mapping tactics. 
No one, no mortal man, can touch you there. 
But we're behind you, hearts intent on battle, 
nor do 1 think you'll find us short on courage, 
long as our strength will last. " 

"Then here's our plan," 
the master of tactics said. "1 think it's best. 
First go and wash, and pull fresh tunics on, 
and tell the maids in the hall to dress well too. 
And let the inspired bard take up his ringing lyre 
and lead off for us all a dance so full of heart 
that whoever hears the strains outside the gates — 
a passerby on the road, a neighbor round about — 



will think it's a wedding-feast that's under way. 

No news of the suitors' death must spread through town 

till we have slipped away to our own estates, 

our orchard green with trees. There we'll see 

what winning strategy Zeus will hand us then. ' 

They hung on his words and moved to orders smartly. 
First they washed and pulled fresh tunics on, 
the women arrayed themselves — the inspired bard 
struck up his resounding lyre and stirred in all 
a desire for dance and song, the lovely lilting beat, 
till the great house echoed round to the measured tread 
of dancing men in motion, women sashed and lithe. 
And whoever heard the strains outside would say, 
"A miracle — someone's married the queen at last! ' 

"One of her hundred suitors. ' 

"That callous woman, 
too faithless to keep her lord and master's house 
to the bitter end — " 

"Till he came sailing home." 

So they'd say, blind to what had happened: 
the great-hearted Odysseus was home again at last. 
The maid Eurynome bathed him, rubbed him down with oil 
and drew around him a royal cape and choice tunic too. 
And Athena crowned the man with beauty, head to foot, 
made him taller to all eyes, his build more massive, 
yes, and down from his brow the great goddess 
ran his curls like thick hyacinth clusters 
full of blooms. As a master craftsman washes 
gold over beaten silver — a man the god of fire 
and Queen Athena trained in every fine technique — 
and finishes of his latest effort, handsome work ... 
so she lavished splendor over his head and shoulders now. 
He stepped from his bath, glistening like a god, 
and back he went to the seat that he had left 
and facing his wife, declared. 



"Strange woman! So hard — the gods of Olympus 
made you harder than any other woman in the world! 
What other wife could have a spirit so unbending? 
Holding back from her husband, home at last for her 
after bearing twenty years of brutal struggle. 
Come, nurse, make me a bed, I'll sleep alone. 
She has a heart of iron in her breast." 

"Strange /72a/7/' 
wary Penelope said. "I'm not so proud, so scornful, 
nor am 1 overwhelmed by your quick change ... 
You look — how well 1 know — the way he looked, 
setting sail from Ithaca years ago 
aboard the long-oared ship. 

Come, Eurycleia, 
move the sturdy bedstead out of our bridal chamber — 
that room the master built with his own hands. 
Take it out now, sturdy bed that it is, 
and spread it deep with fleece, 
blankets and lustrous throws to keep him warm." 

Putting her husband to the proof — but Odysseus 
blazed up in fury, lashing out at his loyal wife: 
"Woman — your words, they cut me to the core! 
Who could move my bed? Impossible task, 
even for some skilled craftsman — unless a god 
came down in person, quick to lend a hand, 
lifted it out with ease and moved it elsewhere. 
Not a man on earth, not even at peak strength, 
would find it easy to prise it up and shift it, no, 
a great sign, a hallmark lies in its construction. 
1 know, 1 built it myself — no one else ... 
There was a branching olive-tree inside our court, 
grown to its full prime, the bole like a column, thickset. 
Around it 1 built my bedroom, finished off the walls 
with good tight stonework, roofed it over soundly 
and added doors, hung well and snugly wedged. 
Then 1 lopped the leafy crown of the olive, 
clean-cutting the stump bare from roots up. 



planing it round with a bronze smoothing-adze — 
I had the skill — I shaped it plumb to the line to make 
my bedpost, bored the holes it needed with an auger. 
Working from there 1 built my bed, start to finish, 
1 gave it ivory inlays, gold and silver fittings, 
wove the straps across it, oxhide gleaming red. 
There's our secret sign, 1 tell you, our life story! 
Does the bed, my lady, still stand planted firm? — 
1 don't know — or has someone chopped away 
that olive-trunk and hauled our bedstead off? " 

Living proof — 
Penelope felt her knees go slack, her heart surrender, 
recognizing the strong clear signs Odysseus offered. 
She dissolved in tears, rushed to Odysseus, flung her arms 
around his neck and kissed his head and cried out, 
" Odysseus— &OYi\. flare up at me now, not you, 
always the most understanding man alive! 
The gods, it was the gods who sent us sorrow — 
they grudged us both a life in each other's arms 
from the heady zest of youth to the stoop of old age. 
But don't fault me, angry with me now because 1 failed, 
at the first glimpse, to greet you, hold you, so ... 
In my heart of hearts 1 always cringed with fear 
some fraud might come, beguile me with his talk; 
the world is full of the sort, 
cunning ones who plot their own dark ends. 
Remember Helen of Argos, Zeus's daughter — 
would shehsMe sported so in a stranger's bed 
if she had dreamed that Achaea's sons were doomed 
to fight and die to bring her home again? 
Some god spurred her to do her shameless work. 
Not till then did her mind conceive that madness, 
blinding madness that caused her anguish, ours as well. 
But now, since you have revealed such overwhelming proof — 
the secret sign of our bed, which no one's ever seen 
but you and 1 and a single handmaid, Actoris, 
the servant my father gave me when 1 came. 



who kept the doors of our room you built so well ... 
you've conquered my heart, my hard heart, at last!" 

The more she spoke, the more a deep desire for tears 
welled up inside his breast — he wept as he held the wife 
he loved, the soul of loyalty, in his arms at last. 
Joy, warm as the joy that shipwrecked sailors feel 
when they catch sight of land — Poseidon has struck 
their well-rigged ship on the open sea with gale winds 
and crushing walls of waves, and only a few escape, swimming, 
struggling out of the frothing surf to reach the shore, 
their bodies crusted with salt but buoyed up with joy 
as they plant their feet on solid ground again, 
spared a deadly fate. So joyous now to her 
the sight of her husband, vivid in her gaze, 
that her white arms, embracing his neck 
would never for a moment let him go ... 
Dawn with her rose-red fingers might have shone 
upon their tears, if with her glinting eyes 
Athena had not thought of one more thing. 
She held back the night, and night lingered long 
at the western edge of the earth, while in the east 
she reined in Dawn of the golden throne at Ocean's banks, 
commanding her not to yoke the windswift team that brings men light. 
Blaze and Aurora, the young colts that race the Morning on. 
Yet now Odysseus, seasoned veteran, said to his wife, 
"Dear woman ... we have still not reached the end 
of all our trials. One more labor lies in store — 
boundless, laden with danger, great and long, 
and 1 must brave it out from start to finish. 
So the ghost of Tiresias prophesied to me, 
the day that 1 went down to the House of Death 
to learn our best route home, my comrades' and my own. 
But come, let's go to bed, dear woman — at long last 
delight in sleep, delight in each other, come!" 



"If it's bed you want, " reserved Penelope replied, 
"it's bed you'll have, whenever the spirit moves, 
now that the gods have brought you home again 
to native land, your grand and gracious house. 
But since you've alluded to it, 
since a god has put it in your mind, 
please, tell me about this trial still to come. 
I'm bound to learn of it later, 1 am sure — 
what's the harm if 1 hear of it tonight?" 

"Still so strange," 
Odysseus, the old master of stories, answered. 
"Why again, why force me to tell you all? 
Well, tell 1 shall. I'll hide nothing now. 
But little joy it will bring you, I'm afraid, 
as little joy for me. 

The prophet said 
that 1 must rove through towns on towns of men, 
that 1 must carry a well-planed oar until 
1 come to a people who know nothing of the sea, 
whose food is never seasoned with salt, strangers all 
to ships with their crimson prows and long slim oars, 
wings that make ships fly. And here is my sign, 
he told me, clear, so clear I cannot miss it, 
and 1 will share it with you now ... 
When another traveler falls in with me and calls 
that weight across my shoulder a fan to winnow grain, 
then, he told me, 1 must plant my oar in the earth 
and sacrifice fine beasts to the lord god of the sea, 
Poseidon — a ram, a bull and a ramping wild boar — 
then journey home and render noble offerings up 
to the deathless gods who rule the vaulting skies, 
to all the gods in order. 

And at last my own death will steal upon me ... 

a gentle, painless death, far from the sea it comes 

to take me down, borne down with the years in ripe old age 

with all my people here in blessed peace around me. 

All this, the prophet said, will come to pass." 



"And so, " Penelope said, in her great wisdom, 
"if the gods will really grant a happier old age, 
there's hope that we'll escape our trials at last." 

So husband and wife confided in each other, 
while nurse and Eurynome, under the flaring brands, 
were making up the bed with coverings deep and soft. 
And working briskly, soon as they'd made it snug, 
back to her room the old nurse went to sleep 
as Eurynome, their attendant, torch in hand, 
lighted the royal couple's way to bed and, 
leading them to their chamber, slipped away. 
Rejoicing in each other, they returned to their bed, 
the old familiar place they loved so well. 

Now Telemachus, the cowherd and the swineherd 
rested their dancing feet and had the women do the same, 
and across the shadowed hall the men lay down to sleep. 

But the royal couple, once they'd reveled in all 
the longed-for joys of love, reveled in each other's stories, 
the radiant woman telling of all she'd borne at home, 
watching them there, the infernal crowd of suitors 
slaughtering herds of cattle and good fat sheep — 
while keen to win her hand — 
draining the broached vats dry of vintage wine. 
And great Odysseus told his wife of all the pains 
he had dealt out to other men and all the hardships 
he'd endured himself — his story first to last — 
and she listened on, enchanted ... 
Sleep never sealed her eyes till all was told. 

He launched in with how he fought the Cicones down, 
then how he came to the Lotus-eaters' lush green land. 
Then all the crimes of the Cyclops and how he paid him back 
for the gallant men the monster ate without a qualm — 
then how he visited Aeolus, who gave him a hero's welcome 
then he sent him off, but the homeward run was not his fate, 
not yet — some sudden squalls snatched him away once more 



and drove him over the swarming sea, groaning in despair. 

Then how he moored at Telepylus, where Laestrygonians 

wrecked his fleet and killed his men-at-arms. 

He told her of Circe's cunning magic wiles 

and how he voyaged down in his long benched ship 

to the moldering House of Death, to consult Tiresias, 

ghostly seer of Thebes, and he saw old comrades there 

and he saw his mother, who bore and reared him as a child. 

He told how he caught the Sirens' voices throbbing in the wind 

and how he had scudded past the Clashing Rocks, past grim Charybdis, 

past Scylla — whom no rover had ever coasted by, home free — 

and how his shipmates slaughtered the cattle of the Sun 

and Zeus the king of thunder split his racing ship 

with a reeking bolt and killed his hardy comrades, 

all his fighting men at a stroke, but he alone 

escaped their death at sea. He told how he reached 

Ogygia's shores and the nymph Calypso held him back, 

deep in her arching caverns, craving him for a husband — 

cherished him, vowed to make him immortal, ageless, all his days, 

yes, but she never won the heart inside him, never ... 

then how he reached the Phaeacians — heavy sailing there — 

who with all their hearts had prized him like a god 

and sent him off in a ship to his own beloved land, 

giving him bronze and hoards of gold and robes ... 

and that was the last he told her, just as sleep 

overcame him ... sleep loosing his limbs, 

slipping the toils of anguish from his mind. 

Athena, her eyes afire, had fresh plans. 
Once she thought he'd had his heart's content 
of love and sleep at his wife's side, straightaway 
she roused young Dawn from Ocean's banks to her golden throne 
to bring men light and roused Odysseus too, who rose 
from his soft bed and advised his wife in parting, 
"Dear woman, we both have had our fill of trials. 
You in our house, weeping over my journey home, 
fraught with storms and torment, true, and 1, 
pinned down in pain by Zeus and other gods. 



for all my desire, blocked from reaching home. 

But now that we've arrived at our bed together — 

the reunion that we yearned for all those years — 

look after the things still left me in our house. 

But as for the flocks those strutting suitors plundered, 

much I'll recoup myself, making many raids; 

the rest our fellow-lthacans will supply 

till all my folds are full of sheep again. 

But now 1 must be off to the upland farm, 

our orchard green with trees, to see my father, 

good old man weighed down with so much grief for me. 

And you, dear woman, sensible as you are, 

1 would advise you, still ... 

quick as the rising sun the news will spread 

of the suitors that 1 killed inside the house. 

So climb to your lofty chamber with your women. 

Sit tight there. See no one. Question no one." 

He strapped his burnished armor round his shoulders, 
roused Telemachus, the cowherd and the swineherd, 
and told them to take up weapons honed for battle. 
They snapped to commands, harnessed up in bronze, 
opened the doors and strode out, Odysseus in the lead. 
By now the daylight covered the land, but Pallas, 
shrouding them all in darkness, 
quickly led the four men out of town. 



 



Peace 



Now Cyllenian Hermes called away the suitors' ghosts, 

holding firm in his hand the wand of fine pure gold 

that enchants the eyes of men whenever Hermes wants 

or wakes us up from sleep. 

With a wave of this he stirred and led them on 

and the ghosts trailed after with high thin cries 

as bats cry in the depths of a dark haunted cavern, 

shrilling, flittering, wild when one drops from the chain — 

slipped from the rock face, while the rest cling tight ... 

So with their high thin cries the ghosts flocked now 

and Hermes the Healer led them on, and down the dank 

moldering paths and past the Ocean's streams they went 

and past the White Rock and the Sun's Western Gates and past 

the Land of Dreams, and they soon reached the fields of asphodel 

where the dead, the burnt-out wraiths of mortals, make their home. 



There they found the ghosts of Peleus' son Achilles, 
Patroclus, fearless Antilochus — and Great Ajax too, 
the first in stature, first in build and bearing 
of all the Argives after Peleus' matchless son. 
They had grouped around Achilles' ghost, and now 
the shade of Atreus' son Agamemnon marched toward them — 
fraught with grief and flanked by all his comrades, 
troops of his men-at-arms who died beside him, 
who met their fate in lord Aegisthus' halls. 
Achilles' ghost was first to greet him: "Agamemnon, 
you were the one, we thought, of all our fighting princes 
Zeus who loves the lightning favored most, all your days, 
because you commanded such a powerful host of men 
on the fields of Troy where we Achaeans suffered. 
But you were doomed to encounter fate so early, 
you too, yet no one born escapes its deadly force. 
If only you had died your death in the full flush 
of the glory you had mastered — died on Trojan soil! 
Then all united Achaea would have raised your tomb 
and you'd have won your son great fame for years to come. 
Not so. You were fated to die a wretched death." 

And the ghost of Atrides Agamemnon answered, 
"Son of Peleus, great godlike Achilles! Happy man, 
you died on the fields of Troy, a world away from home, 
and the best of Trojan and Argive champions died around you, 
fighting for your corpse. And you ... there you lay 
in the whirling dust, overpowered in all your power 
and wiped from memory all your horseman's skills. 
That whole day we fought, we'd never have stopped 
if Zeus had not stopped f/5with sudden gales. 
Then we bore you out of the fighting, onto the ships, 
we laid you down on a litter, cleansed your handsome flesh 
with warm water and soothing oils, and round your body 
troops of Danaans wept hot tears and cut their locks. 



Hearing the news, your mother, Thetis, rose from the sea, 

immortal sea-nymphs in her wake, and a strange unearthly cry 

came throbbing over the ocean. Terror gripped Achaea's armies, 

they would have leapt in panic, boarded the long hollow ships 

if one man, deep in his age-old wisdom, had not checked them: 

Nestor — from the first his counsel always seemed the best, 

and now, concerned for the ranks, he rose and shouted, 

'Hold fast, Argives! Sons of Achaea, don't run now! 

This is Achilles' mother rising from the sea 

with all her immortal sea-nymphs — 

she longs to join her son who died in battle!' 

That stopped our panicked forces in their tracks 

as the Old Man of the Sea's daughters gathered round you — 

wailing, heartsick — dressed you in ambrosial, deathless robes 

and the Muses, nine in all, voice-to-voice in choirs, 

their vibrant music rising, raised your dirge. 

Not one soldier would you have seen dry-eyed, 

the Muses' song so pierced us to the heart. 

For seventeen days unbroken, days and nights 

we mourned you — immortal gods and mortal men. 

At the eighteenth dawn we gave you to the flames 

and slaughtered around your body droves of fat sheep 

and shambling longhorn cattle, and you were burned 

in the garments of the gods and laved with soothing oils 

and honey running sweet, and a long cortege of Argive heroes 

paraded in review, in battle armor round your blazing pyre, 

men in chariots, men on foot — a resounding roar went up. 

And once the god of fire had burned your corpse to ash, 

at first light we gathered your white bones, Achilles, 

cured them in strong neat wine and seasoned oils. 

Your mother gave us a gold two-handled urn, 

a gift from Dionysus, she said, 

a masterwork of the famous Smith, the god of fire. 

Your white bones rest in that, my brilliant Achilles, 

mixed with the bones of dead Patroclus, Menoetius' son, 

apart from those of Antilochus, whom you treasured 

more than all other comrades once Patroclus died. 

Over your bones we reared a grand, noble tomb — 



devoted veterans all, Achaea's combat forces — 
high on its jutting headland over the Hellespont 's 
broad reach, a landmark glimpsed from far out at sea 
by men of our own day and men of days to come. 

And then 

your mother, begging the gods for priceless trophies, 

set them out in the ring for all our champions. 

You in your day have witnessed funeral games 

for many heroes, games to honor the death of kings, 

when young men cinch their belts, tense to win some prize — 

but if you'd laid eyes on theseiX. would have thrilled your heart, 

magnificent trophies the goddess, glistening-footed Thetis, 

held out in your honor. You were dear to the gods, 

so even in death your name will never die ... 

Great glory is yours, Achilles, 

for all time, in the eyes of all mankind! 

But 1? 

What joy for /Tie when the coil of war had wound down? 

For 772^ return Zeus hatched a pitiful death 

at the hands of Aegisthus — and my accursed wife." 

As they exchanged the stories of their fates, 
Hermes the guide and giant-killer drew up close to both, 
leading down the ghosts of the suitors King Odysseus killed. 
Struck by the sight, the two went up to them right away 
and the ghost of Atreus' son Agamemnon recognized 
the noted prince Amphimedon, Melaneus' dear son 
who received him once in Ithaca, at his home, 
and Atrides' ghost called out to his old friend now, 
"Amphimedon, what disaster brings you down to the dark world? 
All of you, good picked men, and all in your prime — 
no captain out to recruit the best in any city 
could have chosen better. What laid you low? 
Wrecked in the ships when lord Poseidon roused 
some punishing blast of gales and heavy breakers? 
Or did ranks of enemies mow you down on land 
as you tried to raid and cut off herds and flocks 
or fought to win their city, take their women? 



Answer me, tell me. 1 was once your guest. 

Don't you recall the day 1 came to visit 

your house in Ithaca — King Menelaus came too — 

to urge Odysseus to sail with us in the ships 

on our campaign to Troy? And the long slow voyage, 

crossing wastes of ocean, cost us one whole month. 

That's how hard it was to bring him round, 

Odysseus, raider of cities." 

"Famous Atrides! " 
Amphimedon's ghost called back. "Lord of men, Agamemnon, 
1 remember it all, your majesty, as you say, 
and 1 will tell you, start to finish now, 
the story of our death, 
the brutal end contrived to take us off. 
We were courting the wife of Odysseus, gone so long. 
She neither spurned nor embraced a marriage she despised, 
no, she simply planned our death, our black doom! 
7]&/5was her latest masterpiece of guile: 
she set up a great loom in the royal halls 
and she began to weave, and the weaving finespun, 
the yarns endless, and she would lead us on: 'Young men, 
my suitors, now that King Odysseus is no more, 
go slowly, keen as you are to marry me, until 
1 can finish off this web ... 

so my weaving won't all fray and come to nothing. 

This is a shroud for old lord Laertes, for that day 

when the deadly fate that lays us out at last will take him down. 

1 dread the shame my countrywomen would heap upon me, 

yes, if a man of such wealth should lie in state 

without a shroud for cover.' 

Her very words, 
and despite our pride and passion we believed her. 
So by day she'd weave at her great and growing web — 
by night, by the light of torches set beside her, 
she would unravel all she'd done. Three whole years 
she deceived us blind, seduced us with this scheme ... 
Then, when the wheeling seasons brought the fourth year on 
and the months waned and the long days came round once more. 



one of her women, in on the queen's secret, told the truth 

and we caught her in the act — unweaving her gorgeous web. 

So she finished it off. Against her will. We forced her. 

But just as she bound off that great shroud and washed it, 

spread it out — glistening like the sunlight or the moon — 

just then some wicked spirit brought Odysseus back, 

from god knows where, to the edge of his estate 

where the swineherd kept his pigs. And back too, 

to the same place, came Odysseus' own dear son, 

scudding home in his black ship from sandy Pylos. 

The pair of them schemed our doom, our deathtrap, 

then lit out for town — 

Telemachus first in fact, Odysseus followed, 

later, led by the swineherd, and clad in tatters, 

looking for all the world like an old and broken beggar 

hunched on a stick, his body wrapped in shameful rags. 

Disguised so none of us, not even the older ones, 

could spot that tramp for the man he really was, 

bursting in on us there, out of the blue. No, 

we attacked him, blows and insults flying fast, 

and he took it all for a time, in his own house, 

all the taunts and blows — he had a heart of iron. 

But once the will of thundering Zeus had roused his blood, 

he and Telemachus bore the burnished weapons off 

and stowed them deep in a storeroom, shot the bolts 

and he — the soul of cunning — ^told his wife to set 

the great bow and the gleaming iron axes out 

before the suitors — all of us doomed now — 

to test our skill and bring our slaughter on ... 

Not one of us had the strength to string that powerful weapon, 

all of us fell far short of what it took. But then, 

when the bow was coming round to Odysseus' hands, 

we raised a hue and cry — he must not have it, 

no matter how he begged! Only Telemachus 

urged him to take it up, and once he got it 

in his clutches, long-suffering great Odysseus 

strung his bow with ease and shot through all the axes, 

then, vaulting onto the threshold, stood there poised, and pouring 



his flashing arrows out before him, glaring for the kill, 
he cut Antinous down, then shot his painful arrows 
into the rest of us, aiming straight and true, 
and down we went, corpse on corpse in droves. 
Clearly a god was driving him and all his henchmen, 
routing us headlong in their fury down the hall, 
wheeling into the slaughter, slashing left and right 
and grisly screams broke from skulls cracked open — 
the whole floor awash with blood. 

So we died, 

Agamemnon ... our bodies lie untended even now, 
strewn in Odysseus' palace. They know nothing yet, 
the kin in our houses who might wash our wounds 
of clotted gore and lay us out and mourn us. 
These are the solemn honors owed the dead." 

"Happy Odysseus!" 
Agamemnon's ghost cried out. "Son of old Laertes — 
mastermind — ^what a fine, faithful wife you won! 
What good sense resided in your Penelope — 
how well Icarius' daughter remembered you, 
Odysseus, the man she married once! 
The fame of her great virtue will never die. 
The immortal gods will lift a song for all mankind, 
a glorious song in praise of self-possessed Penelope. 
A far cry from the daughter of Tyndareus, Clytemnestra — 
what outrage she committed, killing the man 5Ae married once! — 
yes, and the song men sing of her will ring with loathing. 
She brands with a foul name the breed of womankind, 
even the honest ones to come!" 

So they traded stories, 
the two ghosts standing there in the House of Death, 
far in the hidden depths below the earth. 

Odysseus and his men had stridden down from town 
and quickly reached Laertes' large, well-tended farm 
that the old king himself had wrested from the wilds, 
years ago, laboring long and hard. His lodge was here 
and around it stretched a row of sheds where fieldhands. 



bondsmen who did his bidding, sat and ate and slept. 

With an old Sicilian woman, too, much in charge, 

who faithfully looked after her aged master 

out on his good estate remote from town. 

Odysseus told his servants and his son, 

"Into the timbered lodge now, go, quickly, 

kill us the fattest porker, fix our meal. 

And 1 will put my father to the test, 

see if the old man knows me now, on sight, 

or fails to, after twenty years apart." 

With that he passed his armor to his men 
and in they went at once, his son as well. Odysseus 
wandered off, approaching the thriving vineyard, searching, 
picking his way down to the great orchard, searching, 
but found neither Dolius nor his sons nor any hand. 
They'd just gone off, old Dolius in the lead, 
to gather stones for a dry retaining wall 
to shore the vineyard up. But he did find 
his father, alone, on that well-worked plot, 
spading round a sapling — clad in filthy rags, 
in a patched, unseemly shirt, and round his shins 
he had some oxhide leggings strapped, patched too, 
to keep from getting scraped, and gloves on his hands 
to fight against the thorns, and on his head 
he wore a goatskin skullcap 
to cultivate his misery that much more ... 
Long-enduring Odysseus, catching sight of him now — 
a man worn down with years, his heart racked with sorrow — 
halted under a branching pear-tree, paused and wept. 
Debating, head and heart, what should he do now? 
Kiss and embrace his father, pour out the long tale — 
how he had made the journey home to native land — 
or probe him first and test him every way? 
Torn, mulling it over, this seemed better: 
test the old man first, 

reproach him with words that cut him to the core. 
Convinced, Odysseus went right up to his father. 



Laertes was digging round the sapling, head bent low 

as his famous offspring hovered over him and began, 

"You want no skill, old man, at tending a garden. 

All's well-kept here; not one thing in the plot, 

no plant, no fig, no pear, no olive, no vine, 

not a vegetable, lacks your tender, loving care. 

But 1 must say — and don't be offended now — 

your plants are doing better than yourself. 

Enough to be stooped with age 

but look how squalid you are, those shabby rags. 

Surely it's not for sloth your master lets you go to seed. 

There's nothing of slave about your build or bearing. 

1 have eyes: you look like a king to me. The sort 

entitled to bathe, sup well, then sleep in a soft bed. 

That's the right and pride of you old-timers. 

Come now, tell me — in no uncertain terms — 

whose slave are you? whose orchard are you tending? 

And tell me this — 1 must be absolutely sure — 

this place I've reached, is it truly Ithaca? 

Just as that fellow told me, just now ... 

1 fell in with him on the road here. Clumsy, 

none too friendly, couldn't trouble himself 

to hear me out or give me a decent answer 

when 1 asked about a long-lost friend of mine, 

whether he's still alive, somewhere in Ithaca, 

or dead and gone already, lost in the House of Death. 

Do you want to hear his story? Listen. Catch my drift. 

1 once played host to a man in my own country; 

he'd come to my door, the most welcome guest 

from foreign parts 1 ever entertained. 

He claimed he came of good Ithacan stock, 

said his father was Arcesius' son, Laertes. 

So 1 took the new arrival under my own roof, 

1 gave him a hero's welcome, treated him in style — 

stores in our palace made for princely entertainment. 

And 1 gave my friend some gifts to fit his station, 

handed him seven bars of well-wrought gold, 

a mixing-bowl of solid silver, etched with flowers. 



a dozen cloaks, unlined and light, a dozen rugs 
and as many full-cut capes and shirts as well, 
and to top it off, four women, perfect beauties 
skilled in crafts — he could pick them out himself." 

"Stranger," his father answered, weeping softly, 
"the land you've reached is the very one you're after, 
true, but it's in the grip of reckless, lawless men. 
And as for the gifts you showered on your guest, 
you gave them all for nothing. 
But if you'd found him alive, here in Ithaca, 
he would have replied in kind, with gift for gift, 
and entertained you warmly before he sent you off. 
That's the old custom, when one has led the way. 
But tell me, please — in no uncertain terms — 
how many years ago did you host the man, 
that unfortunate guest of yours, my son ... 
there was a son, or was he all a dream? 
That most unlucky man, whom now, 1 fear, 
far from his own soil and those he loves, 
the fish have swallowed down on the high seas 
or birds and beasts on land have made their meal. 
Nor could the ones who bore him — mother, father — 
wrap his corpse in a shroud and mourn him deeply. 
Nor could his warm, generous wife, so self-possessed, 
Penelope, ever keen for her husband on his deathbed, 
the fit and proper way, or close his eyes at last. 
These are the solemn honors owed the dead. 
But tell me your own story — that I'd like to know: 
Who are you? where are you from? your city? your parents? 
Where does the ship lie moored that brought you here, 
your hardy shipmates too? Or did you arrive 
as a passenger aboard some stranger's craft 
and men who put you ashore have pulled away?" 

"The whole tale," 
his crafty son replied, "I'll tell you start to finish. 
1 come from Roamer-Town, my home's a famous place, 
my father's Unsparing, son of old King Pain, 



and my name's Man of Strife ... 

I sailed from Sicily, aye, but some ill wind 

blew me here, off course — much against my will — 

and my ship lies moored off farmlands far from town. 

As for Odysseus, well, five years have passed 

since he left my house and put my land behind him, 

luckless man! But the birds were good as he launched out, 

all on the right, and 1 rejoiced as 1 sent him off 

and he rejoiced in sailing. We had high hopes 

we'd meet again as guests, as old friends, 

and trade some shining gifts." 

At those words 
a black cloud of grief came shrouding over Laertes. 
Both hands clawing the ground for dirt and grime, 
he poured it over his grizzled head, sobbing, in spasms. 
Odysseus' heart shuddered, a sudden twinge went shooting up 
through his nostrils, watching his dear father struggle ... 
He sprang toward him, kissed him, hugged him, crying, 
"Father — 1 am your son — myself, the man you're seeking, 
home after twenty years, on native ground at last! 
Hold back your tears, your grief. 
Let me tell you the news, but we must hurry — 
I've cut the suitors down in our own house, 
I've paid them back their outrage, vicious crimes!" 

"Odysseus 

Laertes, catching his breath, found words to answer. 
"You — you're truly my son, Odysseus, home at last? 
Give me a sign, some proof — 1 must be sure." 

"This scar first," 
quick to the mark, his son said, "look at this — 
the wound 1 took from the boar's white tusk 
on Mount Parnassus. There you'd sent me, you 
and mother, to see her fond old father, Autolycus, 
and collect the gifts he vowed to give me, once, 
when he came to see us here. 

Or these, these trees — 
let me tell you the trees you gave me years ago, 
here on this well-worked plot ... 



I begged you for everything I saw, a little boy 
trailing you through the orchard, picking our way 
among these trees, and you named them one by one. 
You gave me thirteen pear, ten apple trees 
and forty figs — and promised to give me, look, 
fifty vinerows, bearing hard on each other's heels, 
clusters of grapes year-round at every grade of ripeness, 
mellowed as Zeus's seasons weigh them down. " 

Living proof — 
and Laertes' knees went slack, his heart surrendered, 
recognizing the strong clear signs Odysseus offered. 
He threw his arms around his own dear son, fainting 
as hardy great Odysseus hugged him to his heart 
until he regained his breath, came back to life 
and cried out, "Father Zeus — 
you gods of Olympus, you still rule on high 
if those suitors have truly paid in blood 
for all their reckless outrage! Oh, but now 
my heart quakes with fear that all the Ithacans 
will come down on us in a pack, at any time, 
and rush the alarm through every island town!" 

"There's nothing to fear," his canny son replied, 
"put it from your mind. Let's make for your lodge 
beside the orchard here. 1 sent Telemachus on ahead, 
the cowherd, swineherd too, to fix a hasty meal." 

So the two went home, confiding all the way, 
and arriving at the ample, timbered lodge, 
they found Telemachus with the two herdsmen 
carving sides of meat and mixing ruddy wine. 
Before they ate, the Sicilian serving-woman 
bathed her master, Laertes — his spirits high 
in his own room — and rubbed him down with oil 
and round his shoulders drew a fresh new cloak. 
And Athena stood beside him, fleshing out the limbs 
of the old commander, made him taller to all eyes, 
his build more massive, stepping from his bath. 



so his own son gazed at him, wonderstruck — 
face-to-face he seemed a deathless god ... 
"Father" — Odysseus' words had wings — "surely 
one of the everlasting gods has made you 
taller, stronger, shining in my eyes!" 

Facing his son, the wise old man returned, 
"If only — Father Zeus, Athena and lord Apollo — 
1 were the man 1 was, king of the Cephallenians 
when 1 sacked the city of Nericus, sturdy fortress 
out on its jutting cape! If I'd been young in arms 
last night in our house with harness on my back, 
standing beside you, fighting off the suitors, 
how many 1 would have cut the knees from under — 
the heart inside you would have leapt for joy !" 

So father and son confirmed each other's spirits. 
And then, with the roasting done, the meal set out, 
the others took their seats on chairs and stools, 
were just putting their hands to bread and meat 
when old Dolius trudged in with his sons, 
worn out from the fieldwork. 
The old Sicilian had gone and fetched them home, 
the mother who reared the boys and tended Dolius well, 
now that the years had ground the old man down ... 
When they saw Odysseus — knew him in their bones — 
they stopped in their tracks, staring, struck dumb, 
but the king waved them on with a warm and easy air: 
"Sit down to your food, old friend. Snap out of your wonder. 
We've been cooling our heels here long enough, 
eager to get our hands on all this pork, 
hoping you'd all troop in at any moment." 

Spreading his arms, Dolius rushed up to him, 
clutched Odysseus by the wrist and kissed his hand, 
greeting his king now with a burst of winging words: 
"Dear master, you're back — ^the answer to our prayers! 
We'd lost all hope, but the gods have brought you home! 



Welcome — health! The skies rain blessings on you! 
But tell me the truth now — this I'd like to know — 
shrewd Penelope, has she heard you're home? 
Or should we send a messenger?" 

"She knows by now, 
old man," his wily master answered brusquely. 
"Why busy yourself with that?" 

So Dolius went back to his sanded stool. 
His sons too, pressing around the famous king, 
greeted Odysseus warmly, grasped him by the hand, 
then took their seats in order by their father. 

But now, as they fell to supper in the lodge. 
Rumor the herald sped like wildfire through the city, 
crying out the news of the suitors' bloody death and doom, 
and massing from every quarter as they listened, kinsmen milled 
with wails and moans of grief before Odysseus' palace. 
And then they carried out the bodies, every family 
buried their own, and the dead from other towns 
they loaded onto the rapid ships for crews 
to ferry back again, each to his own home ... 
Then in a long, mourning file they moved to assembly 
where, once they'd grouped, crowding the meeting grounds, 
old lord Eupithes rose in their midst to speak out. 
Unforgettable sorrow wrung his heart for his son, 
Antinous, the first that great Odysseus killed. 
In tears for the one he lost, he stood and cried, 
"My friends, what a mortal blow this man has dealt 
to all our island people! Those fighters, many and brave, 
he led away in his curved ships — he lost the ships 
and he lost the men and back he comes again 
to kill the best of our Cephallenian princes. 
Quick, after him! Before he flees to Pylos 
or holy Elis, where Epeans rule in power — 
up, attack! Or we'll hang our heads forever, 
all disgraced, even by generations down the years, 
if we don't punish the murderers of our brothers and our sons! 



why, life would lose its relish — for me, at least — 
I'd rather die at once and go among the dead. 
Attack! — before the assassins cross the sea 
and leave us in their wake." 

He closed in tears 
and compassion ran through every Achaean there. 
Suddenly Medon and the inspired bard approached them, 
fresh from Odysseus' house, where they had just awakened. 
They strode into the crowds; amazement took each man 
but the herald Medon spoke in all his wisdom: 
"Hear me, men of Ithaca. Not without the hand 
of the deathless gods did Odysseus do these things! 
Myself, 1 saw an immortal fighting at his side — 
like Mentor to the life. 1 saw the same god, 
now in front of Odysseus, spurring him on, 
now stampeding the suitors through the hall, 
crazed with fear, and down they went in droves!" 

Terror gripped them all, their faces ashen white. 
At last the old warrior Halitherses, Master's son — 
who alone could see the days behind and days ahead — 
rose up and spoke, distraught for each man there: 
"Hear me, men of Ithaca. Hear what 1 have to say. 
Thanks to your own craven hearts these things were done! 
You never listened to me or the good commander Mentor, 
you never put a stop to your sons' senseless folly. 
What fine work they did, so blind, so reckless, 
carving away the wealth, affronting the wife 
of a great and famous man, telling themselves 
that he'd return no more! So let things rest now. 
Listen to me for once — 1 say don't attack! 
Else some will draw the lightning on their necks." 

So he urged 

and some held fast to their seats, but more than half 
sprang up with warcries now. They had no taste 
for the prophet's sane plan — ^winning Eupithes 
quickly won them over. They ran for armor 
and once they 'd harnessed up in burnished bronze 



they grouped in ranks before the terraced city. 
Eupithes led them on in their foolish, mad campaign, 
certain he would avenge the slaughter of his son 
but the father was not destined to return — 
he'd meet his death in battle then and there. 

Athena at this point made appeals to Zeus: 
"Father, son of Cronus, our high and mighty king, 
now let me ask you a guestion ... 
tell me the secrets hidden in your mind. 
Will you prolong the pain, the cruel fighting here 
or hand down pacts of peace between both sides?" 

"My child, " Zeus who marshals the thunderheads replied, 
"why do you pry and probe me so intently? Come now, 
wasn't the plan your own? You conceived it yourself: 
Odysseus should return and pay the traitors back. 
Do as your heart desires — 
but let me tell you Aowit should be done. 
Now that royal Odysseus has taken his revenge, 
let both sides seal their pacts that he shall reign for life, 
and let us purge their memories of the bloody slaughter 
of their brothers and their sons. Let them be friends, 
devoted as in the old days. Let peace and wealth 
come cresting through the land." 

So Zeus decreed 

and launched Athena already poised for action — 
down she swept from Olympus' craggy peaks. 

By then Odysseus' men had had their fill 
of hearty fare, and the seasoned captain said, 
"One of you go outside — see if they're closing in." 
A son of Dolius snapped to his command, 
ran to the door and saw them all too close 
and shouted back to Odysseus, 
"They're on top of us! To arms — and fast!" 
Up they sprang and strapped themselves in armor, 
the three men with Odysseus, Dolius' six sons 



and Dolius and Laertes clapped on armor too, 

gray as they were, but they would fight if forced. 

Once they had all harnessed up in burnished bronze 

they opened the doors and strode out, Odysseus in the lead. 

And now, taking the build and voice of Mentor, 
Zeus's daughter Athena marched right in. 
The good soldier Odysseus thrilled to see her, 
turned to his son and said in haste, "Telemachus, 
you'll learn soon enough — as you move up to fight 
where champions strive to prove themselves the best — 
not to disgrace your father's line a moment. 
In battle prowess we've excelled for ages 
all across the world." 

Telemachus reassured him, 
"Now you'll see, if you care to watch, father, 
now I'm fired up. Disgrace, you say? 
1 won't disgrace your line!" 

Laertes called out in deep delight, 
"What a day for me, dear gods! What joy — 
my son and my grandson vying over courage!" 

"Laertes!" 

Goddess Athena rushed beside him, eyes ablaze: 
"Son of Arcesius, dearest of all my comrades, 
say a prayer to the bright-eyed girl and Father Zeus, 
then brandish your long spear and wing it fast!" 

Athena breathed enormous strength in the old man. 
He lifted a prayer to mighty Zeus's daughter, 
brandished his spear a moment, winged it fast 
and hit Eupithes, pierced his bronze-sided helmet 
that failed to block the bronze point tearing through — 
down Eupithes crashed, his armor clanging against his chest. 
Odysseus and his gallant son charged straight at the front lines, 
slashing away with swords, with two-edged spears and now 
they would have killed them all, cut them off from home 
if Athena, daughter of storming Zeus, had not cried out 



in a piercing voice that stopped all fighters cold, 
"Hold back, you men of Ithaca, back from brutal war! 
Break off — shed no more blood — make peace at once!" 

So Athena commanded. Terror blanched their faces, 
they went limp with fear, weapons slipped from their hands 
and strewed the ground at the goddess' ringing voice. 
They spun in flight to the city, wild to save their lives, 
but loosing a savage cry, the long-enduring great Odysseus, 
gathering all his force, swooped like a soaring eagle — 
just as the son of Cronus hurled a reeking bolt 
that fell at her feet, the mighty Father's daughter, 
and blazing-eyed Athena wheeled on Odysseus, crying, 
"Royal son of Laertes, Odysseus, master of exploits, 
hold back now! Call a halt to the great leveler. War — 
don't court the rage of Zeus who rules the world!" 

So she commanded. He obeyed her, glad at heart. 
And Athena handed down her pacts of peace 
between both sides for all the years to come — 
the daughter of Zeus whose shield is storm and thunder, 
yes, but the goddess still kept Mentor's build and voice. 